‘There Are Breonnas Everywhere’: Protests for Breonna Taylor in Pictures
The New York Times 
September 24, 2020 Thursday 11:13 EST
Highlight: The New York Times has photographers on the ground following protests across the country.
Protests extended into a second night in Louisville on Thursday, with demonstrators expressing outrage and anguish over Breonna Taylor’s killing in March and the prosecutors’ handling of the case. For months, Ms. Taylor’s family had pleaded for justice, pushing for criminal charges against the officers.
The tensions spilled onto the street on Wednesday after a grand jury charged one former officer with wanton endangerment for firing recklessly but did not charge the two officers who shot Ms. Taylor. Two police officers were shot during protests that followed the announcement of the grand jury’s findings.
Anger over Ms. Taylor’s death  has spread far from Louisville, with protests drawing crowds in cities across the nation. Some rallies on Wednesday night, like those in Portland, Maine, and Memphis, were small but vocal, while protests in Seattle and Portland, Ore., were effectively declared riots after demonstrators set fires and threw explosives at the police.
Louisville
People visited a memorial to Ms. Taylor at Jefferson Square in Louisville on Thursday.
Black protesters confronted white militia members armed with rifles in a parking lot.
Demonstrators marched through downtown Louisville.
A standoff between law enforcement and protesters developed after the city’s curfew went into effect.
Some protesters tried to take refuge at a church.
The demonstrations, which have gone on for months, are likely to continue into the weekend.
Louisville
Protesters poured into the streets after the grand jury announcement.
The demonstrators called for all three officers, who are white, to be held to account for Ms. Taylor’s death in March.
Ms. Taylor’s death, which came months before George Floyd was killed by the Minneapolis police, became a rallying cry for racial justice protesters nationwide.
Law enforcement secured the area where a police officer was shot on Wednesday night.
At least two police officers were shot shortly before a 9 p.m. curfew.
New York City
Demonstrators gathered outside of Barclays Center in Brooklyn on Wednesday night.
The crowd there swelled to around 2,000 people.
Protesters marched across the Manhattan Bridge.
Chicago
About 100 people marched on Chicago’s South Side, stopping to shut down traffic in the Auburn Gresham neighborhood for about an hour.
The protesters used a gallon of fake blood to spell “Breonna” in the middle of the intersection, and then sat in the street and chanted, “We want justice, we want it now.”
Atlanta
Demonstrators gathered on the steps of the Georgia State Capitol.
Members of the National Guard were also posted outside of the State Capitol.
Seattle
People gathered to pay tribute to Ms. Taylor during a protest in Seattle.
Protesters lit candles and placed flowers at a vigil outside of the U.S. District Court in Seattle.
Portland, Ore.
Law enforcement and protesters clashed during protests on Wednesday night.
Protesters gathered outside of the Multnomah County Justice Center, the site of more than 100 nights of demonstrations in Portland.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Xavier Burrell for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
$$$
