In Photos: Protesters March in Cities Across America
The New York Times 
June 1, 2020 Monday 10:01 EST
Highlight: George Floyd’s death continued to resonate far beyond Minneapolis, where he died. In Boston, Philadelphia, New York, Ferguson, Mo., Portland, Ore., Los Angeles and countless other cities, demonstrations raged. 
For over two weeks, protests swept across the United States in a forceful outcry against systemic racism and police brutality inspired by the killing of George Floyd on May 25 in Minneapolis. A widely viewed video that showed Officer Derek Chauvin holding a knee to Mr. Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes provoked outrage and swift condemnation.
Local protests that began in Minneapolis quickly spread to New York, Washington and Los Angeles as well as Ferguson, Mo., Tampa, Fla., and Tulsa, Okla. Demonstrators took to the streets by the thousands demanding justice for Mr. Floyd and in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. Protesters clashed, sometimes violently, with police forces, many in cities that had been under stay-at-home orders because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Four officers at the scene were fired and arrested, and Mr. Chauvin was ultimately charged with second-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter, but largely peaceful protests continued through a second weekend and six days of memorials for Mr. Floyd in Minneapolis, Raeford, N.C., and Houston, where he was buried on Tuesday. By Saturday, protests had been held in hundreds of American cities and towns and around the world.
Tuesday, June 9
Houston
People chanted George Floyd’s name as his funeral procession neared the cemetery.
Mr. Floyd’s coffin was carried inside the Fountain of Praise church before his funeral.
Family and friends gathered for Mr. Floyd’s funeral, including his 6-year-old daughter, Gianna, center.
The Rev. Al Sharpton delivered the eulogy during the funeral.
Philonise Floyd being comforted during the funeral service for his brother.
A visitor outside the Fountain of Praise church before the funeral for Mr. Floyd on Tuesday.
Louisville, Ky.
A new mural featuring Mr. Floyd and Breonna Taylor.
Seattle
Demonstrators protesting the death of George Floyd outside a police precinct in the Capitol Hill neighborhood. The Seattle Police Department left the precinct building the day before after it became a flash point for confrontations with some of the demonstrators.
Minneapolis
Visitors at the memorial for Mr. Floyd in Minneapolis on Tuesday.
Monday, June 8
Houston
Mourners stood in line for the memorial for Mr. Floyd at the Fountain of Praise church.
Paying respects at the coffin inside the church.
A vigil in honor of Mr. Floyd.
Minneapolis
Lavelle Jones pointed out a new street sign dedicated to Mr. Floyd that was installed overnight near the site where Mr. Floyd was pinned down by a police officer. “When I initially saw the video of George Floyd’s murder, I saw it as a public lynching,” Mr. Jones said. “I’m just grateful to say that I can see this change. I was a part of the change. I was a part of the evolution.”
Law enforcement officers guarded the front doors at the Hennepin County Public Safety Facility before a bond hearing for Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer who was charged with murder in the killing of Mr. Floyd.
A memorial for Mr. Floyd at the site of where he was pinned at the neck by a police officer.
A protest outside the Hennepin public safety building before Mr. Chauvin’s hearing.
New York
Demonstrators in Manhattan marched against police brutality.
A chalk portrait of Mr. Floyd in Jackson Heights.
Residents in Jackson Heights applauded a rally calling for the defunding of the New York Police Department and for more investment in schools.
Washington
Shawn Perkins painted a mural on a boarded-up building on Black Lives Matter Plaza in downtown.
Members of Congress held a moment of silence in honor of Mr. Floyd before unveiling new law enforcement and equal justice legislation on Capitol Hill.
Messages in Lafayette Square against racism and police violence.
Shelby Township, Mich.
A small group of demonstrators laughed and shouted, “Why do you hate us?” at an agitator who yelled racist slurs at them from his apartment window.
Los Angeles
A symbolic funeral procession in the center of the city.
Sunday, June 7
New York
Demonstrators gathered outside the Police Athletic League’s Wynn Center in Brooklyn to pray and protest.
Demonstrators also gathered in Central Park.
Protesters danced through Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
Minneapolis
The number of people, flowers, and public art pieces at the George Floyd memorial site is growing larger every day.
A “die-in” was held at the University of Minnesota.
A candlelight vigil honored Mr. Floyd and other victims of police brutality.
Louisville
Protesters marched through downtown Louisville.
A makeshift memorial for Breonna Taylor, who was shot and killed by the Louisville police.
Protesters gathered in front of a federal building.
St. Louis
Ashley Muhammad and her son Naeem Muhammad watched a march from her hair salon.
Protesters marched from City Hall to Metropolitan Police Headquarters.
People listened to speakers before the march.
Seattle
Jordan Chaney raised his fist during a moment of silence for lives lost to gun and police violence.
Washington
Part of the Black Lives Matter text painted on 16th Street, which leads to the White House.
Livonia, Mi.
Protesters were silent for eight minutes and 46 seconds, the amount of time George Floyd is said to have been pinned to the ground by a white police officer’s knee.
Callicoon, N.Y.
A protest march was peaceful.
Los Angeles
A demonstrator shouted slogans.
Boston
A protester at a police barricade during a protest.
Houston
A mural of George Floyd.
Saturday, June 6
Minneapolis
Mayor Jacob Frey was confronted by protesters at a march urging defunding of the police.
People gathered outside the Minnesota Governor’s Mansion.
Danielle Burns, whose brother Jamar Clark was shot and killed by the Minneapolis police in 2015, was one of many hoping to get the governor’s attention regarding police brutality. “This is why it’s so riled up right now,” she said. “It’s because we are not divided, we are together. We all deserve justice."
Amity Dimock, 46, the mother of Kobe Heisler, who was killed by the police in 2019, hugged a demonstrator at a protest outside the Minnesota Governor’s Residence over Mr. Floyd’s killing.
Raeford, N.C.
Inside a Free Will Baptist church in tiny Raeford, N.C., Mr. Floyd’s body had been returned to the state of his birth for a public viewing on Saturday.
Mourners, some on horseback, gathered at the church, the Cape Fear Conference B Headquarters, for the public viewing of Mr. Floyd.
The Hoke County Peacekeepers arrived with black balloons in his honor.
New York
On a 10th day of protests against police brutality and racism, thousands of people in New York City gathered and marched in demonstrations filling the streets of, in areas including Manhattan’s Washington Square Park.
One of the three main protests in New York stepped off from the northwest corner of Central Park.
People took to the roofs of cars to demonstrate in Brooklyn.
Protesters once again marched across the Brooklyn Bridge.
Protesters on bikes gathered at Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn.
The streets of Manhattan were still active with demonstrators as night fell and the citywide curfew went into effect.
Washington
Medical workers taking a knee alongside protesters in the streets.
Outside the White House, protesters filled the street brandishing signs and an upside down United States flag.
At certain points, the demonstration felt more like a community celebration. Many danced as music blared through speakers.
Mike D’Angelo hugged a young man while speaking to a crowd of protesters about the power of women.
A protester addressed the crowds on Capitol Hill in front of the Dirksen Senate Office Building.
Demonstrators painted the words “Defund the Police” next to the city commissioned mural of “Black lives Matter.”
Louisville, Ky.
People gathered in memory of Breonna Taylor for a prayer walk and demonstration in downtown Louisville.
Police Officer Matthew Foust embraced an organizer, Cherrie Vaughn, during the memorial.
Balloons released by demonstrators filled the sky.
Demonstrators gathered in downtown Louisville on Saturday.
Seattle
A large crowd of medical professionals, students and civilians gathered outside City Hall to listen to speakers.
St. Louis
Thousands gathered in 90-degree heat on Saturday to speak out against racism after Mr. Floyd’s death in Minneapolis.
People watched from a front lawn as protesters marched in a Black Lives Matter Peace Walk organized by the Kirkwood Teachers of Color.
Los Angeles
People showing their support for the protest.
Protesters passed by U.S. National Guards, as they marched through West Hollywood.
Black Lives Matter activists (sitting atop car) led over a mile long procession of demonstrators toward Beverly Hills.
Friday, June 5
New Orleans
Protesters walked to the Mississippi River during the eighth night of Black Lives Matter protests at Jackson Square.
A boarded-up window in the French Quarter on Friday.
Louisville, Ky.
University of Louisville Hospital physicians took a knee in memory of black lives lost.
A memorial for Breonna Taylor, who would have turned 27 on Friday.
Protesters took a knee on Jefferson Street for 8 minutes 46 seconds, the length of time a Minneapolis police officer had his knee on Mr. Floyd’s neck.
Minneapolis
Protesters gathered Friday evening at the memorial site for Mr. Floyd.
People gathered outside of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety before marching to the State Capitol as rallies continued on Friday evening.
Flowers from Mr. Floyd’s funeral were delivered to a memorial near where he died.
Photographing a building that was destroyed during protests earlier in the week.
Residents organized a food pickup in Minneapolis. The damage caused in protests this week has affected residents’ ability to get food.
Washington
A protester held a sign near the entrance to Lafayette Park on Friday afternoon.
A street near St. John’s Episcopal Church was renamed Black Lives Matter Plaza.
Clergy members gathered for the renaming ceremony.
A mural was painted on the road.
New York
Protesting the death of Mr. Floyd in Brooklyn.
A vigil was held at Domino Park in Williamsburg for Ms. Taylor’s birthday.
Thursday, June 4
Largely peaceful protests stretched into their 10th day, as George Floyd’s family held a memorial in Minneapolis on Thursday.
Minneapolis
Mourners carried the coffin of Mr. Floyd on Thursday to the site of a memorial service in his honor in Minneapolis.
“I’m here to support the cause,” said Ikran Mohamed, pictured outside the memorial service. We know that all of the injustices against African-Americans has been present beyond what has been caught on camera, so I’m here to be present in fighting against those injustices.”
Sahara Walker cried at the memorial service for Mr. Floyd, who died in police custody last week.
“I just came to pay my respects to George Floyd and so many others throughout history. I’ve been so angry and upset this past week, but mostly tired of it all,” Mario Grant said.
People prayed during Mr. Floyd’s service at the memorial near where he died.
New York
Protesters marched through the streets of Harlem.
New Yorkers continued to protest police brutality, and warm weather greeted them.
An arrest after curfew.
A helicopter flew overhead as residents watched the police arrest protesters in the Bronx.
Washington
Protesters on Constitution Avenue.
Members of the Senate Democratic Caucus participated in a moment of silence in Emancipation Hall at the U.S. Capitol.
Concrete barriers were placed behind the security fences outside the White House.
Detroit
Capt. Rodney Cox, center, escorted hundreds of demonstrators marching to protest police violence.
Oakland
Community members painted murals downtown in honor of black Americans who have been killed by police officers.
Los Angeles
Protests also continued in Los Angeles.
Chicago
An aerial photo of marchers.
Anna, Ill.
Jessica Moore, of Ullin, Ill., right, attempting to hold dialogue with a counterprotester.
Philadelphia
A protest on John F. Kennedy Plaza.
Boston
A show of solidarity.
Wednesday, June 3
From coast to coast, protesters had a consistent reaction to the charges that have now been brought against three additional police officers in the death of George Floyd: It’s good news — and it’s not nearly enough. They called for convictions and systemic change.
Minneapolis
George Floyd’s son Quincy, center, visited the memorial to his father with the family’s lawyer, Benjamin L. Crump, left.
Praying at the memorial where Mr. Floyd died in police custody.
Veronica Clark embraced her brother, Joe Clark, at the memorial. She was pleading for him to stay safe and alive.
Washington
Marching at night.
At the front line of a daytime demonstration.
Father Timothy Cole prayed for protesters and the police.
St. Louis
A raised fist during a march in the St. Louis suburb of St. Charles, Mo.
Demonstrators paused for a moment in honor of Mr. Floyd.
Jason Love, right, a St. Charles police officer, received a fist bump from a protester.
Los Angeles
A moment of silence in front of the Hall of Justice downtown.
A woman directed traffic during a protest in West Hollywood.
A member of the National Guard waved to protesters.
New York
Protesters knelt in Brooklyn.
Residents cheered from their balconies as protesters made their way through the streets.
The police made arrests after curfew in Manhattan.
Louisville, Ky.
Deandrea Barber at an Louisville intersection where a local chef, David McAtee, was shot and killed by the police this week.
A convoy of Black Lives Matter demonstrators.
Men guarded a local business downtown.
Detroit
Demonstrators marched in Detroit.
More than a thousand protesters participated.
Protesters gathered peacefully outside Mayor Mike Duggan’s residence.
Tacoma
A photo of Manuel Ellis, who died in police custody in March, in Tacoma, Wash.
Marcia Carter-Patterson, center, Mr. Ellis’s mother, addressed a vigil for him in Tacoma, Wash., on Wednesday.
Seattle
Thousands marched peacefully in Seattle.
Izaeh Hyde Ford, 6, at the protest.
Protesters near a barricade guarded by the police and the National Guard.
Houston
Brooklyn Prince, 8, and Ashley Prince in a caravan of protesters driving through downtown.
Oakland
Several thousand protesters gathered in downtown Oakland, defying a curfew.
Portland, Ore.
Protesters walked onto the Morrison Bridge in Portland.
Boston
A “die-in” on Boston Common.
Tuesday, June 2
The eighth day of protests was largely peaceful, with only sporadic reports of looting overnight. Washington is becoming a heavily armed fortress, and criticism of President Trump’s response is mounting.
Minneapolis
The memorial where George Floyd died in the custody of the Minneapolis police.
Protesters gathered at the Minnesota State Capitol.
Gianna Floyd, 6, daughter of George Floyd, and her mother, Roxie Washington, talked with reporters about his death.
New York
Protests continued in Manhattan.
Anwar Hussain cleaned up the souvenir shop he has managed for 18 years after another night of looting.
Police officers after the curfew began in the Bronx on Tuesday.
Louisville, Ky.
Tank Sullivan stood guard outside Dino’s Food Mart after demonstrators threw a Molotov cocktail onto the roof the night before.
A boarded-up nail salon.
A late-night protest after curfew.
Washington
Protesters demonstrated near the White House.
Protesters took a knee across the street from Saint John Paul II National Shrine.
Senator Elizabeth Warren and her husband, Bruce, at protests near the White House.
Houston
Protesters on horseback showed up in the downtown area.
Philonise Floyd, a brother of George Floyd, spoke at a protest rally.
Thousands gathered for another day of protest.
Atlanta
The police and the National Guard moved against protesters after curfew.
A protester threw a smoke device at the police during a demonstration.
Protesters moved through downtown earlier in the day.
Boston
A daytime protest.
Protesters set off fireworks during a rally.
Facing off with law enforcement.
Los Angeles
Members of the National Guard watched as demonstrators marched along Hollywood Boulevard.
Demonstrators greeted members of the National Guard.
A police officer knelt during the protest.
Richmond, Va.
Protesters gathered around the statue of the Confederate general Robert E. Lee near downtown.
Orlando, Fla.
The police deployed tear gas during a demonstration outside City Hall.
Monday, June 1
Protests and looting continued around the country. Tear gas filled the streets near the White House. And curfews were ignored as demonstrators took to the streets in places like New York, Minneapolis, Los Angeles and elsewhere.
Minneapolis
Protesters gathered at the site of Mr. Floyd’s fatal encounter with the police.
Terrence Floyd visited the memorial site for his brother, George Floyd.
Cleaning up graffiti after the protests.
New York
The protests were mostly peaceful, but reports of looting later in the night prompted Mayor Bill de Blasio to announce that the 11 p.m. curfew would be moved up on Tuesday to 8 p.m.
Participants and observers of the protests said they had never seen expressions of grief and anger of such magnitude.
Protesters walked across the Brooklyn Bridge.
Louisville, Ky.
People were caught in tear gas fired by the police.
Kentucky state troopers dressed in full riot gear advanced on demonstrators who were violating curfew and refused to disperse.
Demonstrators also protested the deaths of Breonna Taylor, who was killed by the police in March, and David McAtee, a local restaurant owner who was shot and killed earlier Monday at a protest.
Los Angeles
Protesters marched along the iconic theater district of Hollywood Boulevard.
Cory Palka, the commander of the Los Angeles Police Department’s Western division, took a knee with protesters after making an impassioned speech in support of a peaceful demonstration.
A mix of people accused of looting or violating curfew were placed under arrest.
Dallas
Protesters marched to the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge.
Police officers surrounded and detained hundreds of protesters.
Demonstrations against police brutality continued on Monday.
Washington
President Trump said he planned for a police and law enforcement presence to “dominate the streets.”
U.S. Park Police officers pushed protesters back near the White House.
A man had tear gas washed off his face after the police advanced on protesters outside the White House.
Philadelphia
Protesters raced up a hill to escape tear gas after a march through Center City.
A protester returned a tear-gas canister.
Shouting in frustration.
Seattle
Protesters with a picture of Mr. Floyd during a demonstration in Seattle, which announced its third night of curfews on Monday.
Thousands marched through the streets.
Some held a prayer vigil by the First African Methodist Episcopal Church.
St. Louis
Fireworks exploded near the police during the protest.
A protester took a knee in front of police officers.
A protester holding a charred American flag.
Oakland, Calif.
Thousands gathered in the city.
Atlanta
Protesters ran from tear gas during a standoff in front of the Georgia State Capitol.
San Francisco
Protesters demonstrated outside of City Hall.
Sunday, May 31
In Washington, the White House went dark as protests flared around it. Rallies, marches and looting engulfed cities from coast to coast. Mayors and police chiefs spent the day explaining, defending and promising full investigations into the actions of officers seen on some disturbing videos.
Washington
Demonstrators started a fire near the White House.
And the police dispersed protesters.
Outside a dark White House, protesters rallied and the police used tear gas on them.
Minneapolis
A tanker truck drove toward thousands of protesters on a Minnesota highway on Sunday.
Masked and armed police officers confronted protesters in the city where Mr. Floyd died.
People gathered at the site of Mr. Floyd’s fatal encounter with the police.
Philadelphia
A woman reacted as she was arrested.
A T-Mobile store was looted.
Ferguson, Mo.
In the city where Michael Brown, an 18-year-old black man, was shot and killed by a white police officer in 2014, protesters came prepared for tear gas with jugs of milk.
As expected, the police used tear gas on the crowd.
Officers stood guard near businesses on South Florissant Road.
New York
Marchers made their way to the Manhattan Bridge in Brooklyn on Sunday.
Protesters gathered in Manhattan.
A sign of solidarity in Brooklyn.
Atlanta
In the city, which has convulsed for several nights, a protester tried to talk to the police amid tear gas downtown.
Columbia, S.C.
Police officers chased a protester through traffic after the curfew went into effect.
Members of law enforcement in riot gear lined up outside of the State Capitol.
Protesters fled from tear gas fired by the police.
Los Angeles
A protester tried to throw a tear-gas canister back at the police in Santa Monica as demonstrators clashed with the police.
A protester shook the hand of a National Guard member after other demonstrators hurled epithets and insults.
The Hollywood location of Melrose Mac, a well-known computer store, was looted and set on fire late Saturday.
San Francisco
People knelt in front of the Hall of Justice.
Tulsa, Okla.
A man fell off an overpass and several people were injured on Interstate 244 when a truck pulling a horse trailer drove through a group of protesters blocking the highway.
Boston
Smoke rose around police officers as they used pepper spray during clashes with protesters.
Miami
Local news outlets reported that the protests on Sunday were peaceful.
Detroit
Police officers launched tear gas canisters at protesters.
Seattle
The National Guard was activated and a curfew put in place, but demonstrators were undeterred.
Tampa, Fla.
Fists were raised to show support for marchers.
PHOTO: George Floyd&#39;s casket being brought to a cemetery in Houston, on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Michael Starghill Jr. for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
$$$
