On the Ground in Louisville
The New York Times 
September 24, 2020 Thursday 19:02 EST
Highlight: Unrest has again rocked the city after a grand jury in Kentucky declined to bring charges against the two officers who shot Breonna Taylor.  Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device:
Via Apple Podcasts | Via Spotify | Via Stitcher
This episode contains strong language.
[Follow our live Breonna Taylor decision and Louisville protests updates.]
Breonna Taylor’s mother and her supporters had made their feelings clear: Nothing short of murder charges for all three officers involved in Ms. Taylor’s death would amount to justice.
On Wednesday, one of the officers was indicted on a charge of “wanton endangerment.” No charges were brought against the two officers whose bullets actually struck Ms. Taylor.
In response, protesters have again taken to the streets to demand justice for the 26-year-old who was killed in her apartment in March.
We speak to our correspondent Rukmini Callimachi, who is in Louisville, Ky., about the reaction to the grand jury’s decision.
On today’s episode:
•	Rukmini Callimachi, a correspondent for The New York Times.
Background reading:
•	A former Louisville police detective has been charged with “reckless endangerment” for his role in the killing of Breonna Taylor. Protesters poured into the streets, and two officers were shot in Louisville after the announcement. The city’s police chief said that neither of the officers’ injuries were life-threatening.
•	A Times investigation explores the events leading up to the shooting of Ms. Taylor and its consequences.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Follow Michael Barbaro on Twitter: @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Bianca Giaever, Liz O. Baylen, Asthaa Chaturvedi and Rachelle Bonja. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, Nora Keller, Sofia Milan and Desiree Ibekwe.
$$$
