New Details About Breonna Taylor’s Life and Death
The New York Times 
September 4, 2020 Friday 15:02 EST
Highlight: ‘The New York Times Presents,’ on FX and Hulu, investigates recordings, 911 calls and over 1,500 pages of police records to reveal a clearer picture of the deadly botched raid.  
‘The New York Times Presents,’ on FX and Hulu, investigates recordings, 911 calls and over 1,500 pages of police records to reveal a clearer picture of the deadly botched raid.
‘The Killing of Breonna Taylor’
Producer/Director Yoruba Richen
Reporter/Producer Rukmini Callimachi
Now streaming on Hulu and available here for New York Times subscribers in the U.S.
Breonna Taylor had fallen asleep watching TV beside her boyfriend when Louisville police officers punched in her door with a battering ram. Fearing an intruder, her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, reached for his gun and fired one shot, wounding an officer.
The police returned fire: A barrage of bullets from different directions tore through nearly every room in Taylor’s apartment, then into two adjoining ones. They sliced through a soap dish, a chair and a table and shattered a sliding-glass door.
[Follow our live Breonna Taylor decision and Louisville protests updates.]
Taylor, a 26-year-old trained E.M.T. who hoped to become a nurse and kept her life goals written on Post-it notes around her apartment, was shot five times. She bled out on the floor of her own home.
Unlike the killing of George Floyd, whose death in May under the knee of a white police officer in Minneapolis was captured on video, the circumstances that led to Taylor’s death in March are murky. There was no body camera footage from the Louisville police officers who opened fire that night.
In a new documentary by The New York Times on FX and Hulu, we reveal details around Taylor’s life and the drug raid that ended in her death.
Dozens of interviews with Taylor’s family, her boyfriend, witnesses and public officials, as well as a review of more than 1,500 pages of police records, evidence logs, transcripts of jailhouse recordings, 911 calls and surveillance photos help tell the story of what happened, and why.
Producers Lora Moftah and Lizzie Blenk
Senior Editor Liz Day
Director of Photography Asad Faruqi
Video Editors Kathryn Hood-Moore, Geoff O’Brien and Becky Goldberg
“The New York Times Presents” is a series of documentaries representing the unparalleled journalism and insight of The New York Times, bringing viewers close to the essential stories of our time.
 $$$
