The Killing of Breonna Taylor, Part 2
The New York Times 
September 10, 2020 Thursday 11:40 EST
Highlight: What thousands of pages of documents tell us about the night the 26-year-old was killed and whether the officers involved will ever be charged.  
This episode contains strong language.
[Follow our live Breonna Taylor decision and Louisville protests updates.]
Breonna Taylor and Kenneth Walker went out for a date on the evening of March 12, opting for dinner at a steakhouse. Ms. Taylor, who was employed at a hospital, had worked four back-to-back overnight shifts, so they decided to let off some steam.
“It was a great day, and it was a normal day,” Mr. Walker said.
The Louisville police raided Ms. Taylor’s home in the early hours of March 13. They were executing a warrant — the department linked her address to Jamarcus Glover, a convicted drug dealer with whom Ms. Taylor had romantic ties.
At 12:40 a.m., the police began banging on her door and eventually rammed it down. The couple’s shouted pleas for those at the door to identify themselves, Mr. Walker said, went unanswered. Afraid and confused, he fired a single shot. The police discharged a hail of bullets into the apartment, killing Ms. Taylor.
“So there’s just shooting, like we’re both on the ground,” Mr. Walker said of the raid. “I don’t know where these shots are coming from, and I’m scared.”
As part of an investigation for The New York Times, our correspondent Rukmini Callimachi and the filmmaker Yoruba Richen spoke to neighbors and trawled through legal documents, police records and call logs to understand what happened that night and why.
In the second and final part of the series, Rukmini talks about her findings.
On today’s episode:
•	Rukmini Callimachi, a correspondent for The New York Times
Background reading:
•	Mr. Glover’s run-ins with the law entangled Ms. Taylor even as she tried to move on. An investigation involving interviews, documents and jailhouse recordings helps explain what happened the night she was killed and how she landed in the middle of a deadly drug raid.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Follow Michael Barbaro on Twitter: @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
Rukmini Callimachi and Yoruba Richen contributed reporting.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Bianca Giaever, Liz O. Baylen, Asthaa Chaturvedi and Rachelle Bonja. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, Nora Keller, Sofia Milan and Desiree Ibekwe.
$$$
