Louisville holds meetings before Thursday's practice
CAMERON TEAGUE ROBINSON
28 Aug 2020
The Louisville football team practiced Thursday evening, as expected.
Despite the growing trend of teams from across all sports boycotting games and skipping practices after Jacob Blake, a 29-year-old Black man in Kenosha, Wisconsin, was paralyzed after being shot in the back seven times by police, Louisville kept its schedule intact.
They did have conversations before practice though.
This came just one day after the Milwaukee Bucks boycotted its postseason game against the Orlando Magic, and an hour after the University of Kentucky players walked out of practice to protest.
Before its 4 p.m. practice, Louisville held a players-only meeting and a full team meeting, with the coaching staff. In those conversations, though not practicing was brought up, it was never strongly considered by the players.
"I don't think it's too much about practicing or not practicing for us, because we want to go and get better, that's what we are here to do," linebacker C.J. Avery said. "But we are aware of the things going on in the world as well. It's a balance of knowing what you got to do and what you got to focus on."
Instead, Louisville spent its time trying to plan ways it can make a change.
The players-only meeting was a time for the players to express their emotions and discuss what it wanted to do moving forward to make a change in the community, alone. That was important, Satterfield said.
"I feel like guys need to be able to speak freely amongst themselves and each other, without having the coaches in the room," Satterfield said. "I thought it was great for our guys to meet as a whole team and by themselves."
In the full team meeting, the players continued those discussions, and the program broke down what it wanted to do moving forward.
This isn't the first time Louisville has had these discussions as a team. When protests sparked in honor of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency room technician who was shot and killed by police on March 13 in her Louisville apartment, the team had discussions as well.
In the summer, within the first week of protests in Louisville, the players who were in town went on a march along the Big Four Bridge. That march featured players, coaches and administrators from Louisville's athletic department. Some players also went downtown the morning after protests to help clean up, as well.
Part of their meetings on Thursday, though, were spent discussing what the team can do next. Neither Satterfield nor Avery went into too much detail about what they decided, but said they do plan to have some kind of full-team protest. The team will also have social media content coming with the players and coaches, as well.
"We got a lot of great things we will be able to do," Satterfield said. "We will get together and do something as a team, we haven't figured out where, but like the bridge we will do something similar to that."
Avery said he wasn't sure of a timetable for when the team will gather, but it will figure out the right time.
Louisville is set to open the season on Sept. 12 against Western Kentucky, who also skipped practice on Thursday. Despite the season being just two weeks away, Avery said the team will find a balance in trying to use their voices for change and also winning football games.
"It's hard to balance, but you have to know what's at stake," Avery said. "There are things going on that are really not good in this world and we want to be part of the change. If we aren't doing anything to be part of the change then we are staying the same."
$$$
