Council slams Taylor case's pace
Tobin, Ben
03 June 2020
The Louisville Metro Council is demanding that Mayor Greg Fischer "put any and all necessary resources" into the police department's Public Integrity Unit to finish its investigation into the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor by Friday.
Metro Council President David James said it is "unacceptable" that the case of Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot by police in her apartment on March 13, has not yet been completed.
"The mayor has that power to do it, he has the power to direct resources there, and we demand that that take place" so it can be turned over to the attorney general, James said during a press briefing Monday.
James' comments came hours after an attorney for Taylor's family told The Courier Journal the investigation into the Louisville Metro Police officers' conduct in the fatal shooting could take two to three more months.
Taylor's death and the time that has elapsed since police began investigating have led thousands to take to the streets of Louisville to demand justice and express frustration.
On Tuesday evening, Fischer told protesters gathered at Jefferson Square Park that the city has handed over the police investigation on the Taylor case to Attorney General Daniel Cameron.
Fischer said on May 20 that the department had handed over its investigation, but Cameron's office said it did not have the full investigation last week.
On Monday, James announced that he is having the Metro Council's Government Oversight Committee look into two incidents regarding police responses to the protests.
First, James said the committee will look into why police fired tear gas on what appeared to be a peaceful demonstration at Jefferson Square before the city's 9 p.m. curfew on Sunday.
Assistant Police Chief LaVita Chavous told reporters Sunday night that police dispersed the crowd because some protesters had leaf blowers that could be used to direct chemicals at police.
She added that it was an illegal protest even before the curfew set in because participants didn't have a permit.
James said Monday this reasoning "doesn't seem adequate."
Additionally, the committee will investigate the circumstances surrounding the fatal shooting of David McAtee, who was killed early Monday morning as Louisville Metro Police and National Guard were trying to break up a "large crowd" in a parking lot at West Broadway and 26th Street.
Police said that shortly after midnight, someone shot at officers at the location, leading the police and National Guard to return fire. Police released additional video footage Tuesday afternoon that they said shows McAtee firing a gun before law enforcement officials returned fire that killed McAtee.
James described McAtee, the owner of YaYa's BBQ, as a friend and someone who cared about the West End.
"We were told (the National Guard) would be used to protect critical assets in our community. And then I find out ... I find out this morning that my friend is dead because of actions taken by the police department," James said through tears.
"We all need to know why. What happened, and why it happened," said James, a former police officer. "Where was the breakdown? How did the National Guard end up being in west Louisville? Why was there such a massive police response to the corner of 26th and Broadway? And why is my friend dead?"
Gov. Andy Beshear ordered Kentucky State Police to investigate the shooting, which will be a joint effort between the FBI Louisville Field Office and the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Western District, federal officials said.
The two Louisville Metro Police officers involved in the shooting did not have body cameras on them, Fischer announced Monday afternoon. This failure to follow police protocol led Fischer to fire LMPD Chief Steve Conrad, who was set to step down at the end of the month.
James also announced several other measures during the Monday press conference, including the creation of a permanent committee on equity and inclusion and legislation to make 911 audio calls and LMPD body cameras subject to open records even if the city has an ongoing investigation.
More than 10 members of the Metro Council and two state legislators spoke during the press conference about the state of Louisville and actions they demand the Fischer administration take.
Councilwoman Paula McCraney, D-7th District, said that the "time is ripe for us to get things right."
"We can no longer stand by the wayside and watch our people suffer," said McCraney, who is a co-chair on the newly formed Civilian Review Board work group.
Councilwoman Donna Purvis, D-5th District, said the "community is tired of being played with" and needs an answer quickly on what led to the fatal shooting of McAtee and why police and National Guard members were dispatched to the West End.
"The community waited too long to get the evidence and the facts leading to Breonna Taylor's murder," Purvis said. "I don't want us to wait another three months to tell us why did we lose another life."
$$$
