Two new members to Metro Council
Costello, Darcy
01 July 2020
Jecorey Arthur and Cassie Chambers Armstrong, who won Democratic primaries in Jefferson County, will be new Louisville Metro Council members next year.
And incumbents Barbara Shanklin and Pat Mulvihill survived primary challenges, leaving Mulvihill unopposed in November and Shanklin facing a Republican on the ballot.
In District 18, Mera Kathryn Corlett won a three-person Democratic primary and will challenge Councilwoman Marilyn Parker.
The Louisville Metro Council primary race results, announced Tuesday, come amid a period of turmoil for the city, which has been rocked by the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, 26.
Scrutiny over police policy and practices has grown into scrutiny over local government decisions, such as approving the police union contract and levels of funding for city agencies, creating an interesting time for new local leaders to step in.
In the past month, the council voted to ban no-knock warrants with "Breonna's Law" and passed a budget that didn't defund police, to the frustration of some protesters who called for police funding to be diverted to other community support agencies.
One committee also announced its intention to investigate Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, along with decisions around police use of force on protesters and curfew enforcement.
Two council members who gave up their Metro Council seats — Councilman Brandon Coan, D-8th District, and Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th — played key roles in some of those discussions.
Coan has publicly called for officers involved in Taylor's shooting to resign and was the only council member to publicly call for defunding police by redistributing some of their city funding to other priorities.
Sexton Smith, meanwhile, was a main co-sponsor of Breonna's Law and is also behind a new proposal to mandate drug and alcohol testing for officers involved in critical incidents such as police shootings. In both districts, there is no Republican running against the Democratic nominee, leaving big shoes for incoming members to fill.
Here's what else to know:
New winners in Districts 4, 8 The Metro Council district that includes downtown, the epicenter of protests for racial justice in recent weeks, drew six contenders.
And the district with the Highlands, a wealthy liberal enclave, drew three.
Both winners will run uncontested in the fall.
Arthur, a teacher, musician and activist, won in District 4 by just 259 votes. He received 1,495 to Robert LeVertis Bell's 1,236, results show.
The other contenders each received fewer than 1,000 votes: Aletha Fields had 660, Darryl J. Young Jr. received 499, Dennisha Rivers (who withdrew from the race) got 335, Adam G. Caperton received 257 and Ron Bolton had 187.
In District 8, Armstrong, an attorney and author, ran away with the race. She received 6,791 votes, beating Shawn Reilly's 2,839 and Daniel Borsch's 1,282.
In an interview after the results came out, Armstrong said she was looking forward to working with Coan on a smooth transition come January and said this election cycle afforded her an opportunity to have conversations with constituents about "really hard and really important" issues.
"It's driven home the importance of thinking of our city as a whole and ways our districts can be involved in creating meaningful change throughout our city," she said. "The pandemic, the calls for racial justice, the need for increased equity are big issues that I think are incumbent on all of us to address."
Shanklin, Mulvihill are victorious Shanklin, in District 2, received 2,715 votes, winning the four-person race. She will run against a Republican challenger in November.
The next closest contender was RaeShanda Lias-Lockhart, who received 1,469 votes.
Mulvihill, meanwhile, won his District 10 race by fewer than 100 votes.
The incumbent councilman received 3,747 to Ryan Fenwick's 3,650.
Mulvihill said Tuesday that this was an unusual election, given the COVID-19 pandemic and difficulties in going to constituents' doorsteps to engage with them, adding that he was pleased to have won but that he missed engaging with residents on their terms.
The incumbent Democrat said he looked forward to moving ahead with some district projects, including a path connecting the Highlands to Schnitzelburg via residential streets. And he said the council has some "big challenges" on how the city moves forward.
Pointing to the budget approved last week, he said he was pleased to see funding for behavioral and mental health specialists to co-respond with police, but called it a first step.
"Louisville is a great city, but we still have work to do making it a city for everybody," Mulvihill said.
November races to watch The results announced Tuesday create a few contested races in the November election.
In District 18, Corlett won the chance to compete against incumbent Republican Councilwoman Parker to represent the district that includes part of the East End and the suburban cities of Bellemeade and Hurstbourne.
Corlett, a justice of the peace for Jefferson County, said Tuesday that it's time for the district to have "dynamic leadership."
"This is a time in our city where we can't have representatives who aren't problem-solvers, who aren't coming to the table with ideas," she said. "Now, more than ever, we need people who are willing to be compassionate and listen and guide."
Parker, who ran unopposed in the primary, told The Courier Journal earlier this year she was running for reelection to "finish the work and projects" she'd started. She said government has two main purposes: public safety and infrastructure.
"We need to keep our neighborhoods safe and our roads paved," said Parker, a registered nurse. "My goal is to promote less government intrusion in people's lives."
In District 16, another Democrat, James Michael Green, will challenge a Republican incumbent — Councilman Scott Reed. Both ran unopposed in the primary elections.
Incumbent Democrats Shanklin, Cindi Fowler and Council President David James face Republican challengers in November.
Shanklin will face off against Folly Aboussa, a student at Sullivan University who said he hoped to focus on bringing youth programs to the District 2 community and providing resources for local businesses.
Fowler, meanwhile will run against Michael Powell, a Republican who couldn't be reached for comment by The Courier Journal.
And James, the council's leader, will run against Republican Kristi Smith.
$$$
