Louisville must listen to protesters in Taylor case and battle injustice
The Courier Journal Editorial Board
30 May 2020
People are angry.
And for good reason.
They want justice after an unarmed African American woman was gunned down in her home in March by Louisville police.
They want to be heard.
The deserve to be heard.
And they have every right to protest, as guaranteed by the First Amendment.
But to those who turned a peaceful gathering Thursday night into a violent confrontation that left seven people shot and scores running for their lives: You have no right to attack others, to fire a gun into a crowd, to damage public property or hurt others who gathered with one purpose in mind – to cry out for justice.
But you do have the right to be angry.
Put simply, Breonna Taylor shouldn't be dead. She shouldn't have been jolted awake by police ramming her apartment door in southwest Louisville. She shouldn't have been shot eight times during a "no-knock" drug raid that turned up no drugs.
And it's not just what happened in Louisville on March 13 to 26-year-old Breonna that stirs that anger.
It's what happened in Minneapolis on May 25 to George Floyd, who died at the hand of a police officer who took a knee on his neck and wouldn't let up even when Floyd told him he couldn't breathe. Three other officers watched the 46-year-old black man lose consciousness and did nothing.
It's what happened in Georgia to Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old African American who was gunned down in February while jogging in a residential neighborhood. It took two months for the people who hunted him down – a retired police detective and his son – to be arrested.
It's what happened to Eric Garner in New York City in 2014. Police put the 43-year-old black man from Staten Island, in a choke hold and wouldn't let go even when he told them, "I can't breathe."
His death sparked a movement.
As did 17-year-old Trayvon Martin's death – in Florida in 2012 – and the acquittal of the neighborhood watch coordinator who killed him.
The movement is Black Lives Matter.
People are angry all over the United States because when you consider what happened to Trayvon Martin and Eric Garner and Breonna Taylor and George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery and on and on, it doesn't seem like black lives matter.
And that is reprehensible.
So, a growing chorus of voices are crying out for justice – in Louisville and across the nation.
Thursday night, Breonna Taylor's family urged protesters to be peaceful.
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer called for calm.
"We must find a way to stop this cycle of injustice," he said. "The violence and the demonstration and the disruption that we saw last night will not get us there."
He is right.
Martin Luther King Jr. once said, "a riot is the language of the unheard."
So if we want peace, then America must listen. Louisville must listen.
Listen to people who don't look like you, who don't live where you live, who don't talk like you.
Listen to people who have suffered from racism and discrimination, educational inequity and economic injustice.
Listen to mothers and fathers who fear for the safety of their black children.
Listen and take decisive action to bring justice to our communities and our country.
Violence is not the answer, but true peace and calm won't come until we listen – and then take responsibility.
$$$
