Accused shooter says he felt 'threatened'
Kobin, Billy
10 July 2020 
Steven Lopez, the Louisville man accused of fatally shooting Tyler Gerth and endangering other protesters at Jefferson Square Park in June, told police he fired into the park because he thought Gerth had a rifle and that others "were coming after him," according to new court testimony.
Explaining why he opened fire at the park June 27, Lopez said he thought he saw someone fire shots toward police officers on Jefferson Street, according to Louisville Metro Police Detective Jeremy McGill.
But there is no evidence that Gerth was armed or that someone fired at police that night, McGill told a prosecutor, public defender and judge Thursday during a probable cause hearing in Jefferson District Court.
Lopez, 23, also appeared Thursday via video from Louisville Metro Corrections.
"(Lopez) stated that people were coming after him (and) they were leading him out of the park," McGill said.
"He said he felt threatened," so he grabbed a gun from a protester and started firing, McGill added.
Lopez told police he shot the person, later identified as Gerth, who he thought had a rifle, and that it was "a fatal shot," McGill said.
The police detective said he assisted with the investigation into the fatal shooting at Jefferson Square Park, which took place about 9 p.m. June 27. The park has served as the hub of local protests over the death of Breonna Taylor and police brutality.
As McGill recapped Thursday, Lopez is accused of fatally shooting Gerth, a 27-year-old photographer, in the face after grabbing a gun from a protester who was among a group that had asked Lopez to leave the park for getting into an earlier altercation.
McGill explained Thursday how a group of protesters "formed a wall" to escort Lopez out of the park toward the corner of Sixth and Liberty streets.
The group did not push or touch Lopez, the detective added.
Video shows Lopez then grab a 9 mm handgun from a man who was a Black Lives Matter protester, The Courier Journal previously reported.
The gun was on the protester's left hip when Lopez took it, McGill testified.
He then immediately fired shots, with police later finding three shell casings by the southwest corner of the park, McGill said.
The protesters who had been escorting Lopez out of the park, including the man whose gun was taken, then are seen backing up and running away from Lopez, McGill said.
Lopez then walked north on Sixth Street, the west boundary of the park, before stopping about halfway between Liberty and Jefferson streets and firing more shots into the park, McGill said.
The detective said 14 more shell casings were found in that area.
Video showed that Gerth was in the center of Jefferson Square Park lying down and trying to take cover next to a wall, McGill said, noting that Gerth was unarmed.
McGill said the video he reviewed does not capture the exact moment Gerth was shot but does show Gerth standing up before falling down.
A female protester near Gerth is also seen in a video standing up and then shooting toward Lopez after the gunfire broke out, McGill said.
The woman later told police that she fired at Lopez "to protect herself and others in the park" that night, according to McGill. She also said that other protesters were aware of Lopez having mental issues.
Several other bystanders also returned fire, with Lopez getting shot in the leg, as police have previously said.
Police later found more shell casings at Sixth and Jefferson streets, with one person later telling police that the bullets came from his gun as he fired at Lopez, McGill said.
Additional shell casings were found in the park, but police have not been able to determine whose gun they came from, the detective added.
After Lopez was taken into custody by the Hall of Justice, hospitalized and discharged a few days later, McGill said he admitted to the shooting in a police interview.
Lopez pleaded not guilty to one count of murder and nine counts of first-degree wanton endangerment following the shooting.
The wanton endangerment counts stem from police identifying and interviewing nine witnesses who were in the park at the time of the shooting, McGill said. He added that the park "was pretty full" that night.
After McGill finished his testimony and answered questions, Lopez's public defender, Sheila Seadler, told Jefferson District Judge Katie King that a second-degree manslaughter charge was more appropriate than a murder charge.
Lopez was in a "public place" and "surrounded" by protesters, some of whom were armed and knew he had mental health problems, Seadler said.
Lopez's grandparents previously told The Courier Journal that their grandson had exhibited symptoms of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
At the time of the shooting, they added that Lopez had not been taking his medication for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
The prosecution disputed Seadler's argument that Lopez was feeling threatened, telling King that the group escorting him out of the park had been "peaceable" and not "physical."
Lopez's statements about wanting to protect police officers on Jefferson Street who he claimed were fired upon were "self-serving," and Gerth represented "no threat to him whatsoever," the prosecutor added.
King agreed with the prosecution and said she found probable cause for Lopez's murder and wanton endangerment charges. A grand jury will take up the case the week of July 27.
Seadler also argued that Lopez's bond of $500,000 is "excessive" and prevents him from getting needed mental health treatment.
But the judge denied the public defender's attempt to lower Lopez's bond.
Lopez remains held in Louisville Metro Corrections ahead of his next court appearance.
Gerth was remembered by family as a vocal supporter of ongoing protests against racism and police brutality who used his camera to document the daily demonstrations.
$$$
