'Fix it, Black Girl' celebrates resilience and power
Gregory, Kathryn
11 June 2020
Actors Theatre of Louisville is going virtual for its 2020-21 Brown-Forman season as it "rigorously reimagines" the role of the arts during a turbulent moment of global uncertainty.
The season, which will include radio broadcasts of fan-favorites such as Fifth Third Bank's "Dracula" and "A Christmas Carol," will also feature vibrant new works including "Fix it, Black Girl," an original curation of spoken word poetry, essay and song by Hannah L. Drake, a Louisville-based and nationally-recognized poet, author and blogger, and a group of black female Louisville artists.
Actors Theatre Direct, the company's new multi-channel approach to virtual storytelling, is exploring how "theatre can be shared and of service to those continuing to process the tragic murder of Breonna Taylor and a weekend of protests and violence, during the ongoing disruptions of the COVID-19 pandemic," Executive Artistic Director Robert Barry Fleming said in a news release announcing the new season.
Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician from Louisville, was shot and killed while police were serving a no-knock search warrant at her apartment. Taylor, a black woman, was not armed, and her death has ignited a firestorm of protest in Louisville and across the U.S., paired with the recent slayings of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery.
The June 12 production of "Fix it, Black Girl," will be a free, virtual event "to celebrate resilience and the power generated by a collective meditation on black women's role in civic and social action," Fleming said in the release.
The professional theatre company is meeting a time of "national unrest with a season of stories that meditate on historical legacy, the transformative nature of courage, conviction and hope," Fleming added, including productions of "Where Did We Sit on the Bus?" by Brian Quijada and "Ali Summit" by Idris Goodwin.
"When informed by an inclusive spirit of adventure, great disruption can lead to prodigious periods of innovation and inspired strides in the development of new media ... and, most importantly, their impact on deepening human connections," he added.
Fleming said a virtual season allows for an "unprecedented moment of exploration," and he encourages viewers to "tell us what intrigues you, spread the word and join us as we iterate, innovate, entertain and envision the future of the American theatre."
While "Fix it, Black Girl," is free, flexible and tiered subscription packages for other productions in the upcoming season will be available starting in July. Subscriber benefits include on-demand access to the season's projects, and supplemental artistic content, resources and experiential activities including shared watch parties and talkbacks, according to the release.
Digital single tickets will go on sale on a rolling schedule and feature pay-what-you-can pricing levels. For more information on tickets or how to watch, visit ActorsTheatre.org.
'Fix It, Black Girl'
By Hannah L. Drake. Featuring Erica Denise, Hannah L. Drake, Janelle Renee Dunn, Robin G, Sujotta Pace and Kala Ross.
WHAT: Hannah L. Drake, Louisville-based and nationally-recognized poet, author and blogger, presents 'Fix It, Black Girl,' an original curation of spoken word poetry, essay and song performed by Drake and Louisville artists in a free, virtual event to celebrate the resilience and power generated by collective action.
WHEN: June 12, 7 p.m.
'The Keep Going Song'
Created and performed by The Bengsons
WHAT: Indie-folk duo Abigail and Shaun Bengson ("Where the Mountain Meets the Sea") return to Actors Theatre with this intimate evening of storytelling through song. In the darkest times, people have long found solace in the sound of their shared voices around a small light, and The Bengsons humbly invite you to lean into the small glow of your phones and computers as they explore living fully even in moments of fear, choosing to love fiercely, and cultivating joy as a form of personal activism.
WHEN: Fall 2020
'COVID-Classics: a collection of one-act plays for the age of quarantine'
WHAT: This vibrant assortment of short plays brings together tales from trailblazing writers whose creative experiments redefined the possibilities of theatre in moments of seismic change. Reimagining works by master dramatists Anton Chekhov, Luigi Pirandello, August Strindberg, and surrealist writer Guillaume Apollinaire, this lively, eclectic collection reaches into the past and finds surprising echoes in the present.
WHEN: Fall 2020
'Where Did We Sit on the Bus?'
By Brian Quijada. Directed by Matt Dickson
WHAT: During a third-grade lesson on Rosa Parks, a Latinx child wonders: where did my people sit on the bus? Infused with an energetic mix of rap, hip-hop, and spoken word, this one-person show captures the experience of growing up in an immigrant family, searching for a place in American history and finding identity in making art.
WHEN: Fall 2020
'Fifth Third Bank's Dracula: A Radio Play'
Inspired by Orson Welles and John Houseman's radio adaptation of the novel by Bram Stoker. New adaptation by Hannah Rae Montgomery and Jenni Page-White. Executive Producer Dan Gediman. Directed by Robert Barry Fleming. Sound design by Sue Zizza
WHAT: Inspired by master of suspense Orson Welles's innovative broadcast, this electrifying listening experience comes to bloodsucking life with the talents of Actors Theatre's creative team, in collaboration with award-winning radio professionals. Tune in for a spine-chilling trip to Transylvania that you won't soon forget.
WHEN: Fall 2020
'Fifth Third Bank's A Christmas Carol: A Radio Play'
Based on the novella by Charles Dickens. Adapted by Amy Wegener. Executive Producer Dan Gediman. Directed by Robert Barry Fleming. Sound design by Sue Zizza
WHAT: This holiday season, Actors Theatre brings Dickens's tale of redemption, connection, and generosity into your home for the whole family to enjoy. This spirited listening experience, brought to life by our creative team in collaboration with award-winning radio professionals, is infused with all the hearty laughs and abundant good cheer that make this story a cherished Christmas classic.
WHEN: Winter 2020
'Erma Bombeck: At Wit's End'
By Allison Engel and Margaret Engel
WHAT: With wisecracking charm, iconic humorist Erma Bombeck takes us through her journey from homemaker, to popular syndicated columnist, to feminist crusader and more. Starring Louisville-based performer Jessica Wortham, this one-woman show is a frank, poignant look at Bombeck's ambition to define herself beyond the roles of wife and mother — while still embracing how these "ordinary" things can bring extraordinary joy.
WHEN: Winter 2021
'Romeo and Juliet'
By William Shakespeare. Directed by Robert Barry Fleming. Part of the Bingham Signature Shakespeare Series
WHAT: Romeo and Juliet, the children of sworn enemies, dare to imagine a world where hearts are not ruled by hatred. Featuring a cast that reflects a multiplicity of racial, ethnic and gender identities, this passion-filled interpretation explores the entrenched divisions that animate contemporary American culture — and the tragic cost of intolerance.
WHEN: Winter 2021
The 45th Humana Festival of New American Plays
WHAT: Full lineup to be announced at a later date; production slated for spring 2021.
'Ali Summit'
By Idris Goodwin. Directed by Robert Barry Fleming. Developed with a multidisciplinary team of artists. Commissioned by Actors Theatre of Louisville.
WHAT: In 1967, world heavyweight boxing champion Muhammad Ali met with a group of the top black athletes in the country, who questioned him about his conscientious objection to serving in the Vietnam War. In this new play with deep local roots, acclaimed playwright and poet Idris Goodwin explores a defining moment in the story of a Louisville icon, collaborating with Actors Theatre to catalyze a dynamic community-building initiative.
Ali Summit is supported by a Building Demand for the Arts grant from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation.
WHEN: Part of the 45th Humana Festival of New American Plays, spring 2021
Breonna Taylor.
$$$
