Current state of affairs
05 June 2020
I am as appalled and angered as anyone when I see what is happening in our world. We have got to treat each other as human beings.
I have stood silently with others at City Hall, the Federal Building, marched in protests and have found it works to effect change. When I see looting, destruction of property, I worry that these very actions will only reinforce the negative image that many have had for those most impacted by injustice and inequality.
When you destroy property, you are putting people out of a job and making people incur expenses trying to rebuild. They well be less likely to listen to you express your pain and rage when destruction makes the headlines, not the message you are trying to impart.
Let your heart be your guide. Join hands and be helpful, not harmful. Rise up and shine. That kind of light will illuminate the problem and hopefully lead to a solution. Lastly, vote. If someone is not serving you, let your ballot send a lasting message. Elected officials are supposed to represent us. Hold them accountable.
Pat Bush
Louisville, 40205
I can't breathe "I can't breathe" is becoming a part of the American vernacular. When will it all end? So many are angry, enraged, irritable, sad, pugnacious, hostile, annoyed and any other adjective that one might want to add to the list. I am so "sick and tired" of all of this. Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor and George Floyd or their families did not deserve any of this. Nor did the hundreds of other African Americans in this country who have experienced this terrible behavior from law enforcement. Hearts must change or more will be saying, "I can't breathe."
Claudia S. Geurin,
Louisville, 40291
Looting for justice? How does looting bring justice to any of the black people killed? Does it bring them respect, peace or honor. Does it bring them any semblance of peace? Is this what Martin Luther King Jr, would have applauded?
Will all this looting and burning and rioting bring equality to blacks? Will Breonna Taylor now be remembered with respect and sorrow, or is her name totally meaningless to those protesters? Does it not, also, now drag her name through the mud? Should we care anymore? History will only remember her now as a time of rioting and looting in Louisville. That just makes me feel a depth of sorrow and sadness I cannot put in words.
At this exact moment, I do not feel the need to have a serious discussion about race inequality. Last week I was ashamed because of the situation and the wrongness of what our police officers did to Breonna. This week I'm angered and ashamed to live among people who have taken her situation and dragged it through the mud in the name of justice.
Debra L Akin
Louisville, 40228
$$$
