Most arrests came early — and for curfew violations
Krauth, Olivia; Bullington, Jonathan
07 June 2020
More than 170 people have been arrested in Louisville amid the Breonna Taylor protests that have enveloped the city over the past 10 days.
Though Mayor Greg Fischer and police raised alarms over property damage and business break-ins almost immediately, a Courier Journal analysis found that the most common charge was violating curfew. And most of those arrests came during the first few days of protests.
Since then, about three dozen people have been arrested on burglary and riot charges that police have included in their overall protest-related arrests — even though several of the incidents were far away from the demonstrations or inside the jail.
Nearly all of those arrested since the protests began May 28 — about 95% of those with addresses available — are from Louisville, Southern Indiana or cities in Kentucky. That casts significant doubt on early claims that outside agitators were stirring trouble.
"I can see no evidence of outside agitators," said Ted Shouse, a defense attorney who represents The Bail Project in bond forfeiture hearings.
"I think they're just saying we couldn't possibly have Louisvillians who are unhappy, when in fact that's exactly what we've got."
In the first days of the demonstrations, advocates scrambled to bail out protesters after courts abruptly closed over safety concerns outside of the Hall of Justice — putting arraignments temporarily on hold.
"They put in a lot of blocks," said Kendall Epley, who works with the Louisville arm of The Bail Project. "They're finding ways to take away freedom."
Hundreds of people have protested near the Hall of Justice nightly since May 28, demanding justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician who was shot and killed while police were serving a no-knock search warrant at her apartment.
Taylor, a black woman, was not armed, and her death has ignited a firestorm of protest in Louisville and across the U.S., paired with the recent slayings of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery.
Anti-police graffiti, garbage cans set ablaze and shattered windows by a few protesters overshadowed the May 29 protest, turning public conversation to property damage and sparking a countywide curfew that has since been lifted.
Curfew violations lead list of charges Police have arrested more protesters after the curfew than before, with the most common charge being a misdemeanor for being out after 9 p.m. Over 100 protesters got hit with some form of curfew violation, according to arrest citations.
Protests resulted in six arrests on May 29. After the curfew was imposed, arrests ballooned the next night to 20 and at least 46 on May 31 before dropping off as police appeared to stop enforcing the curfew.
Attending an unlawful assembly, which officials have said the downtown protests were because protesters did not request a permit to assemble, is the second-most common charge — about 56 charges over the first nights of the protests.
Several protesters face charges of both.
The protesters arrested, according to a Courier Journal analysis, are racially diverse but tend to be younger.
White men make up a slightly larger portion of the protest-related misdemeanors, such as curfew violations. Black men make up the majority of riot charges and other felonies police have included among overall protest arrests.
"I think the arrests are catch as catch can for the officers," Shouse said. "It's a chaotic scene. (Officers) are grabbing whoever they can. Those people arrested are overwhelmingly peaceful protesters."
About 90% of those arrested during protests from May 28 through June 1 had been released by the afternoon of June 2, Epley said.
Several were aided by a team of attorneys offering free legal service, she added, and 29 have been bailed out by The Bail Project.
The Bail Project, along with similar funds, has seen donations spike in light of protests and resulting arrests. There were issues with the online portal used by the jail to accept bond payments, Shouse said, which caused further delays for people trying to be released.
"There was a good deal of fear and confusion," Shouse said. "They wanted to know when they were getting out, and I wasn't able to tell them."
A 'packed high school cafeteria' Willa Tinsley, a Louisville native, was arrested the evening of May 31 on her fourth night of protesting in the city. The 20-year-old college student was with several dozen protesters near East Broadway and South Brook Street around 10 p.m. when they were met with pepper spray balls from authorities.
Officers in riot gear barked orders, she said, as she and the others were lined up against a fence and told to keep their hands raised.
Their wrists zip-tied, they were led to a waiting police wagon and taken to jail.
After midnight, Tinsley said she was led to a processing room that resembled a "packed high school cafeteria" of young people waiting to take mug shots, then placed in a room with about 30 other women.
First, a jail guard told her she would likely be released by 7 a.m. Then it was 9 a.m.
"It was always, 'You're about to get out,'" she said.
The delays, she was told, were the result of few staffers available for paperwork, the large number of arrests and the protests outside making it unsafe for court to take place.
In the interim, she said jail guards would occasionally tell some of the protesters that their behavior was hurting their cause, or that they were being taught a lesson by being held so long.
Tinsley was finally arraigned around 1 p.m. Monday but was not officially released from jail until sometime between 3 and 4 a.m. Tuesday.
"I understand the protesters did this by violating curfew, but was this an appropriate use of taxpayer dollars to keep somebody in jail 30 hours?" asked her mother, Amber Tinsley.
"None of it makes any sense to me in how they're treating people, even if people violated the law."
Court briefly closed for safety After being shuttered for the weekend over safety concerns, Jefferson County Circuit Court abruptly closed early Monday — leaving protesters to languish in jail for up to 24 hours — while the court, already slowed by virus-related restrictions, struggled to keep up with its large docket.
Chief District Judge Anne Haynie said she "erred on the side of caution" over safety concerns when she ordered the Hall of Justice to close from 3:30 p.m. May 29 through 7:30 a.m. June 1.
The wave of protest-related arrests and the sudden court closure only elevated the fears of exposure to the coronavirus. After protesting in a crowd of hundreds, arrested protesters were shuffled through booking and cramped cells where social distancing was difficult. Several protesters had masks hanging from their necks in their mug shots.
Courts have been closed since March because of the pandemic, meaning those unable to post bail may have to wait in jail for weeks or months for a court date.
Arrested protesters are having their lives put at risk for minor violations, Epley said. Law enforcement, she said, is "sticking people in a disease box."
Jessica Arrington, one of six arrested at a protest last weekend, was afraid to hug her 5-year-old daughter when she was released from jail the next day.
With the pandemic still in play, she said, there's no telling what she was exposed to in her one night at Metro Corrections.
"Coronavirus is in the jail," she said, as staffers and inmates alike have tested positive within the past two months, but she didn't see officers working that night taking necessary precautionary steps. At least four people touched her hands during the intake process, she said, and they weren't wearing masks or gloves.
The least of her worries, she said, was the beautiful weather on May 30 she missed that she said corrections officers taunted her about as she was stuck in jail.
" I just thought to myself, 'If he thinks me not getting to go outside and hang out in the park is my biggest issue right now, he's so much stupider than I thought,'" Arrington said. "My fear is for my life. My fear is for my family, who doesn't know what's going on. My fear is contracting the virus."
$$$
