Metro Council OKs Fischer probe
Costello, Darcy
15 July 2020
The Louisville Metro Council committee looking into Mayor Greg Fischer's handling of the Breonna Taylor case, David McAtee's death and protests in the city voted to authorize the investigation Tuesday.
The unanimous vote means the Government Oversight and Audit Committee can move forward in inviting Metro Government employees to testify under oath and pursue documents and records.
"Ultimately, what we want is to get the truth out there for the people of Jefferson County," said Councilman Brent Ackerson, D-26th District, the committee chairman.
The committee members ultimately held off on issuing subpoenas — despite lengthy discussion in the hourslong meeting about issuing them for former Chief Steve Conrad and interim Chief Robert Schroeder.
Some council members expressed concern about the precedent of issuing subpoenas without first making a request for information or testimony, with one calling it "completely unprecedented" in the area of legislative subpoenas.
At the end of the meeting, committee members appeared to agree that they would invite Schroeder to testify, potentially under oath, at their next committee meeting in two weeks.
The written order, unanimously approved, outlines that the investigation's scope will be:
Exploring actions and inactions of Fischer, his leadership team, his administration and LMPD that led to the search warrant execution and shooting death of Taylor.
Identifying and sharing all policies, processes and practices in place that impacted or described the death of Taylor and McAtee.
Identifying any shortcomings in training or policy that led to the search warrant execution at Taylor's apartment and her death.
Identifying any "errors or omissions" in procedures, best practices and "follow-up decisions" made by LMPD and Fischer's administration, in relation to both Taylor's and McAtee's deaths.
Exploring actions and inactions related to the protests following Taylor's death.
Metro Council members announced in June that a committee planned to investigate Fischer's handling of the Taylor case and his administration's response to ongoing demonstrations for racial justice, including tear-gassing protesters and events surrounding the fatal shooting of McAtee.
Last week, the council additionally demanded that Fischer's administration turn over all documents related to the Taylor case, including any related to allegations that her death was tied to gentrification.
In a news release sent Tuesday before the committee meeting, Fischer said in response to the "threat" of subpoenas that his administration has always given the Metro Council information it sought.
"I'm not clear on why Council would need to issue subpoenas, since we have never declined to make Metro employees available for council and committee meetings, nor declined to provide any data that we're able to provide," Fischer said.
"All Council has to do is ask, and we'll provide what we're able to release," he added.
The Government Oversight and Audit Committee has the power under state law to issue subpoenas to compel Metro Government employees and board or commission members either to testify before the committee or to provide records related to an audit or investigation.
Ackerson said Tuesday he was interested in subpoenaing people to come in to gain information about what documents the council wanted to pursue.
"There's a concern we'd be inundated" otherwise, Ackerson told council members.
Fischer's Tuesday release also reiterated his previous position, cited in a Sunday letter to council members, that he is unable to provide "all documents" that relate to the case, as some are being reviewed by the FBI, Department of Justice and state attorney general's office "for potential criminal prosecution."
"You are aware of this fact and have been for some time," Fischer wrote in the Sunday letter.
Council members appeared to acknowledge on Tuesday that they wouldn't want to jeopardize the ongoing criminal investigations. Proponents for the language in the written order said they wanted to cast a wide net in order to not have to continually return to edit the language.
Fischer's release included documents the Metro Council had requested relating to the city's efforts on the Elliott Avenue project and the police department's Place Based Investigation unit's work on the street, beginning in December 2019.
Among them: multiple arrest citations for people accused of selling drugs out of the home at 2424 Elliott Ave. on three different occasions, documentation of the city's efforts to crack down on the home's owner and records of the former owner donating the property to the city for $1.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
People watch a protest over the shooting of Breonna Taylor from the steps of the Metro Council building on May 28.
$$$
