8 primaries to watch on Tuesday
Sonka, Joe
21 June 2020
Republican House Speaker David Osborne was elected by his party's caucus to serve another term leading the House chamber this year, but ... a public school teacher is running a primary challenge to defeat him.
In Kentucky's Tuesday election, there are competitive primary races in 29 of the state House districts, as Republican and Democratic voters choose their candidates to be placed on the general election ballot this fall.
While most observers expect Republicans to be in no danger of losing their large majority in the House this fall – holding 62 seats to the Democrats' 38 – their supermajority in the chamber could crumble if they lose just a few seats.
A supermajority consists of three-fifths of a chamber, with 60 votes needed in the House to pass appropriation bills in odd-numbered years and to pass proposed constitutional amendments to be placed on the ballot for a statewide vote.
This year's primary races feature scrambles to replace longtime incumbents who have retired in districts trending toward the opposing party, as well as entrenched incumbents facing a new challenges from within their own party.
Here is a rundown of eight key primary races to watch:
House District 1 Rep. Steven Rudy, an eight-term Republican from Kentucky's westernmost district, is facing a primary challenge from Carroll Hubbard – a well-known name in the region who recently switched parties.
Hubbard represented the state's 1st Congressional District as a Democrat for 18 years until losing in 1992, with his involvement in a House check-kiting scandal leading to his two-year prison sentence for violating federal campaign finance laws.
A previous comeback attempt failed when he ran for state Senate in 2006 and 2008, but now Hubbard – still plagued with legal troubles – is trying to win office in the conservative district as a pro-Trump Republican.
Rudy, the chairman of the powerful House Budget Committee, has received sweeping endorsements from groups such as Kentucky Right to Life and the National Rifle Association, as well as a video endorsement by Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky.
Though Rudy has a significant fundraising advantage in the race, Hubbard loaned his campaign $30,000, enough to place TV and newspaper advertisements. In one of the ads, Hubbard revealed his informal poll of 30 people in the district on how they felt about dog groomers opening amid the pandemic.
House District 30 Rep. Tom Burch is the oldest and longest-serving representative in the House. The 88-year old Democrat has served 23 terms in his central Louisville district.
This year, Burch is facing a primary challenge from Daniel Grossberg, a 41-year-old real estate agent and Jefferson County commissioner who says it is time for "new leadership" to emerge in the party.
Burch – who has a long liberal voting record and has received endorsements from labor unions, the Jefferson County Teachers Association and the Fairness Campaign – has countered in campaign material that "in these tough times, experience matters," touting his "trusted leadership."
Grossberg has posted numerous photos and video of himself at marches and protests downtown in reaction to the killing of Breonna Taylor, in addition to a video endorsement by Ricky Jones, the chairman of the University of Louisville's Department of Pan-African Studies and a Courier Journal columnist. Jones took issue with Burch saying in an interview that African Americans are satisfied with the status quo.
The district includes West Buechel and Newburg, which have a large African American population.
House District 40 The Democratic primary in this Louisville district is a rematch from the 2018 race, when Nima Kulkarni ousted 11-term incumbent Dennis Horlander by a wide margin.
Kulkarni, an attorney who immigrated to Louisville from India as a child, has a wide range of endorsements that she didn't have in her first run for office, including the Greater Louisville Central Labor Council, Jefferson County Teachers Association, Kentuckians for the Commonwealth and Fairness Campaign.
Horlander has said he was "unable to serve and campaign" during 2018 because of two back surgeries and the death of his son and father, but is now able to commit fully to the job.
Kulkarni has a large cash advantage in the rematch, having raised four times the total of Horlander, according to their most recent campaign finance reports.
House District 43 Two Democratic candidates are vying to be elected to this north Louisville district left open by incumbent Rep. Charles Booker's run for U.S. Senate.
The competitive primary race for the district – stretching from Indian Hills in the east through downtown to the West End – is between Pamela Stevenson, a retired colonel with the Air Force and a nonprofit attorney, and David Snardon, a pastor and community activist.
Stevenson ran for the same office in 2018, losing to Booker by 377 votes. Her campaign is focused on addressing structural inequality and protecting veterans, receiving the endorsement of the Greater Louisville Central Labor Council.
Snardon's campaign has stressed access to affordable housing and health care along with police reform, often participating in the many marches and protests in Louisville over the past month. He has received the endorsement of the Fairness Campaign, Kentuckians for the Commonwealth and local civil rights icon Mattie Jones.
Both campaigns had raised about $10,000 when they filed their finance reports in late May, in what is expected to be a close race.
House District 45 Conservative firebrand Stan Lee is stepping away from his seat after representing this suburban, south Lexington district for 20 years, with two Democratic candidates vying to replace the Republican in an area trending blue in recent years.
Shirley Flynn Mitchell was a civil engineering officer in the U.S. Navy and currently is an employee with Valvoline, running a campaign focused on strengthening public education and promoting economic growth.
Mitchell is the only Democratic primary candidate endorsed by the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce this year. Corey Nichols, a Democrat who also filed for the office, dropped out of the race last month and endorsed Mitchell.
Sean "Mike" Pickard, a public school teacher in Lexington, says he wants to protect teachers pensions and raise new revenue through sports betting and medical marijuana.
The winner of the Democratic primary faces Republican Killian Timoney in November.
House District 50 The Republican primary for this Nelson County district has ranged from negative to bizarre, as a member of the GOP House majority caucus takes on a Nelson County GOP chairman who seems to be a magnet for controversy.
Rep. Chad McCoy, an attorney, is seeking his third term in the House, where he has already risen to the position of majority whip in the Republican caucus and sponsored bills passing into law to help the local bourbon industry.
His challenger, Donald Thrasher, is the chairman of the Republican Party of Nelson County and has spent much of the past year airing his personal feud with McCoy on social media or to anyone who will listen.
In November, Thrasher confronted McCoy in Frankfort at a legislative committee meeting over an anonymous mailer in Nelson County alleging he had a long criminal history. After Thrasher accused him of being behind the mailer, McCoy pulled out a copy of it to taunt him.
Thrasher, who many years ago was involved in the leak of the infamous Paris Hilton sex tape with his roommate at the time, drew more attention after writing a post suggesting there is a historical defense of the effigy hanged from a tree of Gov. Andy Beshear last month by the president of a right-wing militia group.
Thrasher has attempted to portray McCoy as insufficiently anti-abortion and supportive of tax increases but has been severely outspent in the race by McCoy. The incumbent has also been assisted by mailers from the Republican State Leadership Committee attacking Thrasher as a "tax-slacker," alleging he had tax liens in multiple states from 2004 to 2011.
House District 59 Republican House Speaker David Osborne was elected by his party's caucus to serve another term leading the House chamber this year but will now face the judgment of Republican voters in his district, as a public school teacher is running a primary challenge to defeat him.
Osborne, who easily defeated a well-funded general election challenger in 2018, has amassed over $153,000 in campaign funds to defend his seat this year, far surpassing his primary challenger, Tiffany Dunn, who has raised only a few thousand dollars.
Dunn, who teaches English as a second language students at a public middle school in Jefferson County and lives in Oldham County, co-founded Save Our Schools KY in 2016, a group opposed to funding charter schools and private school scholarship tax credits – which Osborne supports – at the expense of public schools.
Osborne's campaign has stressed his experience and influence as speaker, saying he secured road projects and preserving funding for public K-12 schools, and he has the endorsement of the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce.
Dunn was endorsed by a number of labor unions, including the PAC of the Kentucky Education Association.
House District 88 Republicans Monteia Mundy and Aaron Yates are facing off in this southeastern Fayette County district, with the winner of the GOP primary going up against Rep. Cherlynn Stevenson, the first-term Democratic incumbent.
This primary jumped into the headlines early in April when Mundy was charged with driving intoxicated and leaving the scene of an accident in Madison County, after which Yates called on her to drop out of the race.
However, Mundy, a 31-year old attorney, decided to press on after pleading guilty to the DUI charge, apologizing for making a mistake and asking voters to forgive her.
Yates, 35, who owns a political consulting company, pounced on the DUI, creating the website monteiamundyexposed.com with her mugshot, a police report and 911 call from that night.
Mundy countered with a video attacking Yates for "continually siding with 'Never Trumpers' to stop President Trump's agenda," while showing images of U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie and state Rep. Savannah Maddox, two strongly anti-government Republicans from Northern Kentucky.
After the video was posted on Facebook, Maddox commented that it was an "outright lie" to say she is opposed to Trump, with Mundy replying by asking Maddox how she could "endorse someone who attacks women and spreads lies?" Hours later, a new version of the video was posted without images of Maddox and Massie.
Mundy has also hit Yates for his work in Colorado consulting for a group that she said "pushed racist diatribes" against immigrants and Michelle Obama.
Reach reporter Joe Sonka at jsonka@courierjournal.com or 502-582-4472 and follow him on Twitter at @joesonka.
Republican House Speaker David Osborne was elected by his party's caucus to serve another term leading the House chamber this year, but ... a public school teacher is running a primary challenge to defeat him.
Two Democratic candidates are vying to be elected to this north Louisville district left open by incumbent Rep. Charles Booker's run for U.S. Senate. The competitive primary race for District 43 — stretching from Indian Hills in the east through downtown to the West End — is between Pamela Stevenson, a retired colonel with the Air Force and a nonprofit attorney, and David Snardon, a pastor and community activist. Stevenson ran for the same office in 2018, losing to Booker by 377 votes.
Tulips bloom outside the Capitol Building.
$$$
