U of L women respond to protests
Robinson, Cameron Teague
10 June 2020
On the third day of protests over Breonna Taylor's fatal shooting by police in her apartment, Louisville women's basketball put out a statement.
It was different than many of the statements put out by teams in response to Taylor's death as well as George Floyd's death and other ongoing racial injustices. It wasn't just head coach Jeff Walz speaking, but his captains, Kianna Smith and Dana Evans, whom he reached out to to see how they wanted to respond.
Walz tweeted the following statement on May 30, the third day of protests in Louisville: "Our captains, Dana and Kianna, and I wanted to release the following statement on behalf of our team: Our team had a great discussion on our Zoom call this week. We believe in communication. We address issues, large and small. We don't think what's going on is right. We can't accept a world that isn't safe for all. We stand with the black community," Walz said. "We will be getting back to campus soon, and we are committed to working together to better our Louisville community with empathy, compassion, and respect for all people. We plan to make a difference through our actions. @UofLWBB will be part of the solution. #ONE."
The statement itself was something Smith and Evans wholeheartedly agreed with, but it also showed them more about the coaching staff. The fact Walz cared enough to reach out to them and put their names on a team statement just emphasized to them more that Walz truly cares about his players.
"It meant a lot because it showed how genuine he was with the situation," Evans said. "Nobody brought it to his attention; I didn't, Kianna didn't, he brought it to us and talked about how he wanted to help change and make sure people know that we are willing to help and do things. It shows his character and how good of a person he is."
It also reinforced Smith's impression of Walz and his staff.
When looking to transfer from California she sensed a staff that not only produced a top-five basketball program and multiple WNBA players, but a group that cared about their players off the court, as well.
"As a white man, he just wanted to know the right things to say and come from a good perspective. I think it's important he got the perspective from his black athletes," she said.
The statement also acted as an outlet for Smith and Evans to use their platform as college athletes to seek change as protests around the country have continued for weeks. Many athletes, both professional and collegiate have done so, including many at Louisville.
"It's been frustrating as a black athlete, but it's also been very motivating to see how many people are coming out and supporting the cause," Smith said. "I think it's been a long time coming and it's exciting for our generation and what we can do to impact our future."
The Louisville women's basketball team has a large, and loyal, fan base that stays as long as an hour after games for autographs, with many of those fans being children.
Evans, the reigning ACC Player of the Year, understands the importance of speaking out and said she isn't worried about the backlash that comes on social media. The popular response from some, on social media, is telling athletes to "stick to sports."
"That is something to consider because you do have people who will say things like that, but that's something you ignore and you just do what you think is best which is speaking out and standing up for what is right," Evans said.
Since that statement, talks have been ongoing within the women's basketball program. They have Zoom meetings to discuss the topic and are now back in town together and are discussing ways they can help the community.
That next step is important to Evans, who applauded her staff for supporting the players.
"I think I can be more vocal about it and I could put more things on social media to help, but you can say as many things on social media as you want, but what are you really trying to do to help? Are you reaching out to people are trying to do more positive things than other protesting?" Evans said. "That's something me and coach Walz and Kianna have been talking about, trying to figure out how we can do this."
Back to work The Cardinals are back in their facility after the COVID-19 pandemic ended their season before an NCAA Tournament run could even begin.
Louisville, which won its third straight ACC regular-season championship and finished the year 28-4, might be in for a better season this year.
Louisville lost key post players Kylee Shook and Bionca Dunham, along with dynamic scorer Jazmine Jones, but return Evans, Mykasa Robinson and a host of others. They also bring in a strong recruiting class led by junior college national player of the year, Ahlana Smith, and the country's No. 7 high school prospect, Hailey Van Lith.
In addition to those two, Louisville will have Smith eligible along with two 2019 top-100 players in Nyah Green and Ramani Parker. Both Parker and Green redshirted their freshman year.
Ending last season before Louisville was able to even attempt a national championship run just adds fuel to the fire for Evans, she said.
"It motivates me. I was a junior last year and now it's my last year to chase a national championship, but also just giving back to our seniors that didn't get a chance to play in a national championship," Evans said.
$$$
