New ad calls for charges against officers
Gardner, Hayes
30 July 2020
A typewriter spells out a simple message in a new TV ad released Wednesday.
The commercial demands Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron and Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer arrest and charge the three police officers involved in the killing of emergency room technician Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman whose death has sparked two months of protests in Louisville.
The ad reads:
Breonna Taylor
#Sayhername
Mayor Fischer
Attorney General Daniel Cameron
Fire. Arrest. Charge.
The police officers who killed her.
Today.
The ad was released by UltraViolet, a women's advocacy group, and Color of Change, a racial justice organization, in support of Black Lives Matter Louisville activists.
There have been local and national calls for the arrests of Louisville police officers Brett Hankison, Jonathan Mattingly and Myles Cosgrove for their roles in Taylor's death on March 13. It was after midnight when the three officers, serving a no-knock warrant in a narcotics investigation, used a battering ram to break in Taylor's door.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired a shot in response, striking Mattingly. The officers then returned fire with at least 22 rounds, hitting Taylor five times. Taylor was briefly alive after she was shot but was not treated.
Hankison has since been fired, but the officers have not been arrested or charged.
"Breonna was an essential member of the Louisville community, an essential worker, and her life mattered," UltraViolet Executive Director Shauna Thomas said in a press release. "We urge AG Cameron and Mayor Fischer to immediately fire the remaining two officers; we also urge them to arrest, charge and revoke Brett Hankison, Jonathan Mattingly and Myles Cosgrove's pensions. We helped make this ad to stand in solidarity with Breonna's family, friends and Black Lives Matter Louisville activists, who have been tirelessly demanding justice for her death. We will not stop until the LMPD are accountable for these horrific and racist acts."
Protests in response to Taylor's death have continued for more than 60 days in Louisville. Demonstrators have been to the homes of both Fischer and Cameron, where 87 protesters were arrested for trespassing.
"It's now been nearly 150 days since Breonna Taylor was murdered and we've yet to see justice done," Scott Roberts, senior director of Criminal Justice Campaigns at Color Of Change, said in a statement. "In the four months since her death, officials have aimlessly shuffled the case around while the three officers responsible continue to roam the streets without a shred of accountability."
The Taylor case is in the hands of Cameron, who said earlier this month that there is no timeline for the completion of the investigation. Last week, Fischer said he's "incredibly frustrated" at how long it has taken.
Black Lives Matter Louisville organizer Chanelle Helm said there are "no real intentions to support justice" by the mayor's office or the Louisville Metro Police Department.
"What we see now is the reason why Black femmes are forgotten when murdered by the state," Helm said in a statement. "Breonna deserves more than this. Breonna's family deserves closure. Breonna's city deserves justice. We will not stop until justice is served for Breonna and other community members taken by the hands of law enforcement."
The ad concludes with a link to justiceforbreonna.org, which encourages visitors to sign a petition and call local authorities. It will run through early August on FOX, ABC, NBC and CBS affiliates in Louisville.
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
$$$
