Black women want more than justice for Taylor
26 July 2020
The foremost reason 26-year-old Breonna Taylor's name continues to echo in Louisville streets is a militant movement led unapologetically by Black women at the grassroots.
They are responsible for some of the most persistent and creative acts of civil disobedience in the city's memory, and have been unrelenting.
But as the protests persist, there is also a political awakening that's occurring especially among Generation Z activists who were Breonna Taylor's peers, about the limitations of the current Democratic establishment to actually do something about their well-being.
The movement began as one rallying against police abuse, but is evolving into one that is just as hostile to gentrification plans and food deserts. It cares nothing about party affiliation either.
"I absolutely adored Mayor Greg Fischer so much, I considered him a pal," Brianna Wright, 24, told On Politics. "We would joke when I saw him out, and I knew his wife because she would come to my job's festivals.
"But he failed me and he failed every Black woman in Louisville," she added. "Now I would like (Fischer) to come out and say, 'I don't care about Black people, I don't care about Black women and I don't care about you Brianna' because that's what his actions have shown me."
Wright's perspective is telling given she made a bit of history after canvassing for Metro Council candidate Jecorey Arthur in the earlier half of the year.
In March, around the time Breonna Taylor was riddled by police bullets, she asked for a bigger role as the team's campaign manager.
She weathered a global pandemic and the erupting racial justice movement to lead Arthur to a victory the Metro Council District 4 seat, which encompasses downtown, by about 300 votes to become the legislative body's youngest member.
Wright's disillusionment with Fischer comes at a time when the overarching national sentiment is that Black women, who are the most loyal Democrat base, are owed something for their votes.
Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has been pressured to vet several African American women to be his potential running mate.
In Kentucky, political observers took notice that Democrat Senate candidate Amy McGrath hired former state Senate contender Denise Gray, of Lexington, in an unspecified role.
This should be a no-brainer given Black women have voted at or above 60% in the past five presidential cycles, and roughly 94% — the highest rate of any group — supported Democrat Hillary Clinton in 2016.
What Wright's generation is asking more and more, however, is what are they getting for their votes.
LuTisha Buckner, a Louisville organizer with Black Lives Matter, said there's a deeper demand outside of having a prominent nonwhite face by your side.
"There's been a game that has been played by Democrats for a long time that if you get a Black person next to you, that's going to pacify us," she said. "But with what's happened in the country with Black Lives Matter and the pandemic is we want real change, real policies and real legislation."
Buckner, 26, worked as a political organizer for former Democratic president candidate Elizabeth Warren's campaign in Colorado.
She said there is a growing conversation about how Louisville needs to have a slate of Black women running for local offices from mayor to county attorney.
"If a Black woman is doing that real work as well, it's what I want," she said. "But I don't need someone to pacify me or be a token. I need someone who is actually going to represent my morals and my ideas with moving this country forward."
Urban League President and CEO Sadiqa Reynolds, who is arguably the most visible Black woman in the city, is at the top of the list for many. She went on Facebook with a heartfelt plea for Fischer to "show us that Black lives matter in Louisville."
"I will never believe that I could be so wrong about someone," Reynolds said in the post.
The message was shared and praised widely by others in the African American community, and reignited speculation that she will seek the mayor's office in 2022.
There isn't a week that goes by that somebody doesn't approach Reynolds about running, she said. But the former judge isn't interested in being mayor.
"If Jesus came, that would be a different story, but I don't think Jesus wants that for me," Reynolds said in an interview. "I hate to admit I'm not (running) because I like the fear of it."
Even if Reynolds hadn't thrown cold water on the speculation, there is a growing sense that appealing to the conscience of Fischer or other establishment Democrats is ineffective and outdated.
Younger Black women, who have more freedom to be outspoken than their mothers or grandmothers within the Black community, have chosen to revolt, said Wright, who is the daughter of poet Hannah Drake.
They plan to ramp up protests and could eventually turn their attention to electoral politics when the time comes, but don't expect them to fall in line with any party, she said.
"It's important to have Black woman on your campaign because we are vocal, we're proud and we're going to tell you about it unapologetically and get it in shape, in my opinion," Wright said.
Reach Phillip M. Bailey at pbailey@courier-journal.com or 502-582-4475. Follow him on Twitter at @phillipmbailey.
On Politics
Phillip M. Bailey
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Brianna Wright
$$$
