Leaders push for policing reforms
Watkins, Morgan
05 June 2020
Louisville Metro Council President David James spoke to state lawmakers Thursday about the city's protests over police brutality and asked them to closely consider policy changes concerning no-knock warrants and civilian oversight of law enforcement.
James appeared before a committee at the state Capitol along with Keturah Herron, a policy strategist for the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky and member of Black Lives Matter Louisville.
Their testimony kick-started a dialogue about police behavior, especially toward black people, and other inequities that Republican state Sen. Whitney Westerfield, the committee's chairman, promised would continue.
Herron urged lawmakers not just to talk, but to take action.
"We have to start creating legislation that is equal for all people, whether it's tax reform, whether it's in our criminal legal system, whether it's in education," she said.
James and Herron also spoke about Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old unarmed black woman who was shot and killed by Louisville police officers in her home in March.
"She was unarmed, and now she's not with us, and her mother doesn't have a daughter. Her sister doesn't have a sister," James said. "And our city is in an uproar."
Here's what else James and Herron had to say:
Critical of LMPD leadership James said issues with Louisville Metro Police Department leadership over the years have caused a degradation of public trust in the department.
"I call it the lack of deposits of credibility and legitimacy because when something like this happens you need to withdraw from that account, and they were unable to," he said of the response to Taylor's death.
He also criticized the lack of body camera footage of the shooting in which Taylor died.
"That caused a lot of distrust that had been earned by the leadership of the police department," he said.
Police use of tear gas, pepper balls James, who previously worked in law enforcement, offered a mixed perspective on the police's use of tear gas and pepper balls during the Louisville protests. He said the protests, which started May 28, began peacefully.
"But there were some provocateurs in that crowd, and it resulted in seven people being shot and the use of tear gas and pepper balls in order to try and calm things down and save lives," he said. "And I never thought I would have to see that in my city, but I did."
However, James was critical of an incident Sunday evening in which he said he learned law enforcement used tear gas "on children and people having a picnic in the (Jefferson Square) park and protesting peacefully."
Herron described her experience with tear gas during a Louisville protest on May 29.
She said she and two other black women were asking a group of protesters who sat down in front of a tanker truck to stand up because it was unsafe.
Within seconds, she said they were tear-gassed.
"Nothing was happening but folks standing, or actually sitting, and we were telling them to get up," she said. "And so, on Friday night, I was exposed and terrorized by tear gas for no reason.
"And I think that I want things to be made clear that it wasn't until after those violent things were placed upon people that people ... became violent toward property," she said.
James suggested lawmakers look at giving civilian review boards that oversee law enforcement the ability to issue subpoenas.
He also recommended they consider severely limiting law enforcement's use of no-knock warrants, one of which was involved in the Taylor case.
"They're dangerous for police officers and they're dangerous for citizens alike, and I believe they should only be used in the most extreme circumstances," he said.
The Kentucky House of Representatives' Democratic leadership also called Thursday for legislative hearings on no-knock warrants, subpoena power for civilian review boards and the lack of uniform standards for body cameras.
Herron said the legislature should approve a previously proposed bill that would restore voting rights to people who have completed their sentence for a felony conviction.
She also stressed the importance of ensuring bills written by black lawmakers actually get heard by the Republican-controlled legislature.
As an example, she mentioned that state Rep. Attica Scott, D-Louisville, drafted a bill to protect people of color from being discriminated against because of their hair.
"That bill did not get heard," Herron said. "And to me, that's blatant disrespect and that's where we see the racism and the white supremacy."
$$$
