Charles Booker's next move: Hood to the Holler, a Kentucky advocacy group
Aulbach, Lucas; LOUISVILLE COURIER JOURNAL
18 July 2020
State Rep. Charles Booker, whose campaign for Kentucky's Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate fell just short last month, has revealed his next step.
Booker announced Thursday the formation of "Hood to the Holler," a 501(c)(4) advocacy group that will seek to advance the causes he supported during his run in the Democratic primary. The Louisville native said in a press release and video that his new organization will put a focus on making it easier to vote, engaging Kentuckians to take part in a more reflective democracy, and "breaking down barriers surrounding the topics of racial justice, generational poverty and more."
"Our first order of business," Booker, a 35-year-old Black man, added, "is to defeat Mitch McConnell so we can transform our future"
Booker was edged by Amy McGrath in the June primary to determine who would face McConnell, the U.S. Senate majority leader seeking a seventh term, in November's general election.
His progressive platform, though, resonated with many voters, and his statewide and national following grew as he took on a visible role during Louisville's Breonna Taylor protests in June. He was endorsed by national figures such as U.S. Sens. Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren during his run before falling to McGrath by 3 percentage points.
Booker said he intends to keep pushing that platform as he supports McGrath against McConnell in November. He wants to expand voting rights – he filed an injunction during the June 23 primary election to get voters who were still lined up in their cars past the 6 p.m. deadline inside the Kentucky Convention Center to vote – ensure automatic restoration of voting rights and "break down the divides that keep us broke and broken."
"From the hood to the holler" was a phrase used repeatedly by Booker and his supporters during his primary campaign. It stressed that those from the inner city of Louisville's West End, such as Booker, and those who live in Kentucky's rural areas have a lot in common.
"Although folks like Mitch McConnell think we are divided, when we come together from the hood to the holler, we are unstoppable," Booker said at a rally in Ashland, according to the local Daily Independent, the day before the election.
More information about Hood to the Holler is available at its website, hoodtotheholler.org.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach.
Booker
$$$
