Data: Most protest arrests misdemeanors
Bullington, Jonathan; Krauth, Olivia
07 June 2020
As he announced an end to the citywide curfew Thursday, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer warned protesters to be vigilant against a "criminal element" out after dark.
"That's what it has to be called when people are bent on destruction, looting, stealing," he said, "and they're hijacking the purpose of the protest."
But a Courier Journal analysis of more than 170 arrests during the Breonna Taylor protests since May 28 show that most have been for misdemeanor charges of curfew violations.
Some of the arrests for vandalism and burglary appear to have little to do with the protests.
Among the arrests over the past week was a 27-year-old Memphis man who is facing federal charges after authorities say he was spotted pulling out a gun during Monday night's protest downtown.
Another 10 arrests were related to a reported riot early morning May 31 inside the Louisville jail.
And nearly 40 people were arrested on charges of burglary or attempted burglary, with most reported between Tuesday and Thursday.
Seven adults were arrested and three juveniles detained after an early Thursday morning break-in at Davis Jewelers in the 9900 block of Hurstbourne Parkway, police said.
Eight people were arrested and charged in two different reported burglaries Tuesday at a Walgreens at 35th and Broadway, while a different Walgreens in the 5200 block of South Third Street was also broken into early Tuesday morning, leading to two arrests.
Additionally, four people were arrested and charged early morning May 31 with trying to break into River City Firearms in the 2900 block of Preston Highway.
Police on Thursday also reported three overnight burglaries to businesses in the 12000 to 14000 block of Shelbyville Road and ATM break-ins from the 1700 block to the 2800 block of West Broadway.
"You can see this is affecting every corner of our city," said LMPD Lt. Col. Josh Judah during a Thursday press conference in which city officials showed surveillance footage of business burglaries and property damage.
That footage has since by criticized by some community activists, who told WFPL it only showed incidents involving black people.
"It's a distraction, it's a distraction and we won't let distractions stop us," Shameka Parrish-Wright, Louisville's site manager for The Bail Project, told the station.
"However many people it was doesn't represent over 700,000 Louisvillians who are impacted by police violence, especially the black community."
$$$
