Beshear to Cameron: Publish evidence in Taylor case
Watkins, Morgan
24 Sep 2020
"Everyone can and should be informed. And those that are currently feeling frustration, feeling hurt — they deserve to know more."
Gov. Andy Beshear
Gov. Andy Beshear called on Attorney General Daniel Cameron on Wednesday to publicly release evidence from his office's investigation into the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
Beshear's call came just a few hours after the announcement that a grand jury indicted only one of the officers involved.
"Today, the attorney general announced a mixture of the findings of his investigation and the decisions of the grand jury," Beshear said. "But he talked about information, facts, evidence that neither I nor the general public have seen. I believe that the public deserves this information."
Beshear said he's asking Cameron to "post online all the information, evidence and facts that he can release without impacting the three ... felony counts in the indictment issued today." He suggested the ballistics reports relevant to the investigation should be made public, for example.
"Everyone can and should be informed," Beshear said at a press conference in the Kentucky Capitol. "And those that are currently feeling frustration, feeling hurt — they deserve to know more."
Beshear publicly made this request less than three hours after Cameron held his own press conference to discuss a Jefferson County grand jury's decision to indict former Louisville Metro Police Detective Brett Hankison on three counts of first-degree wanton endangerment.
Hankison was one of three Louisville police officers involved in the shooting at Taylor's apartment on March 13. The grand jury did not charge the other two officers with a crime.
When asked Wednesday whether he would release the full grand jury report, Cameron said he wouldn't right now, citing the pending indictment and an ongoing FBI investigation concerning the Taylor case.
"But at this point I don't think it's appropriate for us to release any information," he said.
Cameron also declined to provide details about the racial and gender makeup of the members of the grand jury.
"The fact that this has received so much scrutiny — I think it'd be inappropriate for me to share the information about the makeup of the grand jury, just to the extent I can protect them," he said in explaining his reasoning.
Beshear said he hopes Cameron will reconsider.
"I certainly think that a legitimate question is the racial and demographic makeup of the grand jury," the governor said. "I don't think it will give out anybody's identity or compromise who they are. And provided that it is sufficiently diverse, it may give people just another piece of information that they can process."
Protesters in Louisville expressed their frustration with the decision to indict one officer on wanton endangerment charges, which they felt was insufficient. And state Rep. Charles Booker made it clear Wednesday that he shares those feelings, as he spoke during Beshear's press conference.
"Justice failed us today," Booker said. "It failed us in a way that it has been failing us for generations."
Booker attracted national attention earlier this year when he was competing in the Democratic primary for U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell's congressional seat — a race he narrowly lost in June. Interest in his candidacy skyrocketed after protests against racism and police brutality began in his hometown of Louisville in late May — demonstrations he took part in himself.
And on Wednesday, Booker said there is no justifying Taylor's death at the hands of police.
"Keep demanding change ... but don't be quiet, don't slow down, and most importantly, lean in with love," he said. "Breonna, thank you for being the light. We'll keep fighting to honor your name."
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"Everyone can and should be informed. And those that are currently feeling frustration, feeling hurt — they deserve to know more."
Gov. Andy Beshear
$$$
