Critics say city settled too soon in Taylor case
Kachmar, Kala
18 Sep 2020
"I don't know if I'd be tossing the word 'murderer' around. All we know is that she was killed. We have no indication if it was done intentionally, recklessly, wantonly or accidentally."
Louisville Metro Council President David James
Served 30 years as a Louisville police officer
Critics of the Louisville Metro Government's record $12 million payout to Breonna Taylor's family say the settlement was premature, and that Mayor Greg Fischer abandoned Louisville police by standing idly by as a protest leader accused officers of murder during a joint press conference Tuesday.
Ryan Nichols, president of the River City Fraternal Order of Police, said many LMPD officers – especially the rank and file – have felt unsupported by Fischer and his lack of leadership since protests started May 28.
But now, after Tuesday's press conference, Nichols fears that the "boots on the ground" officers think Fischer shares the same feelings about them as the activists.
"He should be commending the officers for continuing to come into work day in and day out in these conditions," Nichols said. "Perhaps he's testing their resolve. Maybe he doesn't want them to show up for work."
At the press conference, Fischer called to announce the $12 million settlement, which also includes police reforms, Until Freedom activist Tamika Mallory said at the podium that the community won't feel calm until the cops responsible for Taylor's death are arrested.
The New York-based protest group has temporarily moved to Louisville to help lead the Breonna Taylor protests.
"It is important our community understands what happened here today is very significant," Mallory said. "... There is an acknowledgment of Breonna Taylor's life and the fact that those officers in this city murdered her."
She also called the department corrupt.
Louisville Metro Council President David James, who served 30 years as a Louisville police officer, said those comments were premature before an investigation is completed into Taylor's death.
"I don't know if I'd be tossing the word 'murderer' around," James said. "All we know is that she was killed. We have no indication if it was done intentionally, recklessly, wantonly or accidentally."
The complaints come as the Louisville Metro Council is set to vote Thursday night on an altered no-confidence resolution on Fischer.
Instead of calling for his resignation, the resolution lists a series of steps Fischer would need to take to "restore trust between the residents of Louisville Metro and its government and to ensure the safety and equality of all its residents."
Jeffersontown Police Chief Rick Sanders, a former member of the Jefferson County Police Department, posted on Facebook Tuesday that he "struggled" with the mayor's press conference and that Fischer shouldn't have allowed anyone to call the officers murderers before the facts come out.
"We should withhold judgment until the attorney general has presented all evidence to a grand jury," he said.
Taylor, 26, was an unarmed Black woman who was shot by LMPD officers five times while serving a no-knock search warrant on March 13.
Her death, along with George Floyd's, has sparked a local and nationwide cry for racial justice, prompting nearly 120 consecutive days of civil unrest and protest in Louisville.
Attorney General Daniel Cameron appointed himself a special prosecutor to look into whether criminal charges should be filed against the officers in the case. No timeline has been released for that decision.
The FBI also is conducting a separate investigation in her shooting.
Mallory said the three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment the night police killed her — Brett Hankison, Myles Cosgrove and Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, as well as Joshua Jaynes, who requested the no-knock warrant — should be charged.
"Restitution is one part, but arresting officers is what will do right by this city," she said.
Mallory told the community at the mayor's podium not to lose sight of the "main focus," which is the indictment of the officers.
"I have to say to you, Mayor Fischer, we want to thank you for your leadership," Mallory said. "But for any reason, if these officers are not indicted, you must instruct your police department to fire every single one of them on the spot. That is called getting justice for Breonna Taylor."
Nichols said it was disrespectful for the mayor — who employs the officers — to offer a platform to a group to speak "hate speech" about LMPD officers. It's especially egregious because the mayor is directly involved in the day-to-day operations of the police department, he said.
Nichols also said the Breonna Taylor and Black Lives Matter banners downtown are in violation of the city's street banner program.
According to the standards and guidelines, the purposes of banners should be for aesthetics, to promote cultural events and to promote Metro-sponsored events. Banners shouldn't be used promote organizations or issues, the document says.
"One of the banners said Black Lives Matter on it, which has been a driving force behind the 100-plus days of unrest we've had here in Louisville and many of their at-times violent actions are directed at police," Nichols told The Courier Journal.
He said a protest call for change nationally doesn't merit specific attacks on police officers.
In a tweet Tuesday, Louisville Metro Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19, said he watched Taylor family lawyers call for criminal charges against LMPD officers while they "stand next to and thank the LMPD boss, Mayor Fischer. Everyone wants to hang the officers out to dry, but their boss gets thanked on stage. Incredible."
"(Fischer) needs to be held accountable," Piagentini said. "Ultimately, it's his department."
Piagentini, a former police officer, also said the decision to settle was made prematurely. But moreso, he said he was shocked that anyone aside from the mayor, Taylor's family and their attorneys would be allowed to make comments at the presser.
Mallory and Keturah Herron from the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky were invited by Taylor's family and counsel, according to Jean Porter, a spokeswoman for Fischer's office.
"We thought it was appropriate for them to be there since the settlement included some of the reforms that they and others they represent have been calling for and pushing for in our streets for over 100 days," she said.
Piagentini said he doesn't begrudge the settlement, Taylor's estate or her family. A settlement was coming, some just thought it was too soon.
"We need to finish the investigation," Piagentini said. "And if officers did indeed do something illegal or did something wrong in the eyes of the law, they are not above the law. But they must go through the process — a trial."
But for Lonita Baker, one of the attorneys for Taylor's family, there was a reason for the speakers who were chosen.
"The press conference and the way that it was set up was meant to show that this is a step but that we still have work to do," she said.
Fischer "doesn't necessarily agree with them, but he also recognizes that he at some point needs to work with the protesters," she said.
Sanders, who has been in law enforcement for four decades, said he grows weary as he sees officers ambushed in their cruisers and disrespected by the public simply because of the badge they wear.
"I watch as the local and national news media and social media try to paint police officers with a broad brush characterizing them as the enemy and villains," Sanders said. "I believe every profession should look introspectively to determine if there are problems and to rectify those problems; we in law enforcement are no different."
Courier Journal reporter Darcy Costello contributed to this story.
Kala Kachmar is an investigative reporter. Reach her at 502-582-4469; kkachmar@courierjournal.com.
Jeffersontown Police Chief Rick Sanders
Frankie Steele/Special to The Courier Journal
$$$
