Heine Bros. backtracks on its prohibition of BLM signs
Kobin, Billy
06 June 2020
Amid local and national protests over police killings of black Americans, Heine Brothers' Coffee took flak on social media Thursday after its president initially told employees to take down any signs inside its Louisville-area locations that express support for the Black Lives Matter movement or Breonna Taylor.
Heine Bros. co-founder and President Mike Mays reversed course Friday and said he will allow employees to post signs related to the BLM movement and Taylor, an ER tech whom Louisville Metro Police officers shot and killed in March while serving a drug-related warrant at her apartment.
No drugs were found inside the apartment. Taylor would have turned 27 years old on Friday.
Mays had initially asked employees who made and posted signs inside a coffee shop with messages such as "Black Lives Matter" or "#JusticeForBreonna" to take them down, according to various posts on social media.
After receiving comments and concerns from various customers and employees, Mays explained his reasoning in a message that did not win over many on social media.
"I know many are hurt and angry about my decision to not allow the posting of BLM or other related signs," Mays wrote. "I hear you and understand. I am angry, too. I am also the leader of our company and I have to make decisions that I believe put our company in the best place to make a real impact, today, tomorrow and for the next 25 years."
The backlash online was swift and unrelenting, with commenters saying they would no longer support a business that "stays silent" when it comes to supporting the black community in order to "not make their white customers uncomfortable."
A follow-up statement Thursday from Heine Bros. said it "acknowledges and shares the deep pain and anger that our black and brown employees, our black and brown neighbors, and so many in our community are feeling due to the recent tragic and unnecessary deaths (of Ahmaud) Arbery, Breonna Taylor, George Floyd and David McAtee."
But the company's words did not seem to do it much good. Mays shared a new statement Friday morning in which he said he "made a mistake yesterday" and signaled he was reversing course on the signs in his coffee shops.
"I heard immediately from many employees that they were hurt and angered by my decision. Last night, I apologized to my employees, admitted that I made a mistake, and I have reversed my decision on the signs," Mays said. "My intentions were not to disrespect or hurt the Black Lives Matter movement, but I understand completely that this is what I have done. I apologize for this. While my actions yesterday do not reflect it, I do truly believe that Black Lives Matter."
"For 25 years, Heine Bros Coffee has worked to contribute positively to our Community," Mays continued. "During this time, I believed that keeping my company apolitical was the best way to be part of making impactful things happen, including working for social and racial justice. Like this country, I am a work in progress. I see now that I misunderstood that the movement to end racial injustice, led by groups like Black Lives Matter, is bigger than politics, and neutrality is not an option if I am committed to racial equity. I acknowledge that I still have much to learn and real work to do if I expect to be able to honestly say that I work for racial justice."
Mays also apologized to customers and said he realizes that "real, sustained action is what is needed."
"As a first step, during the next 10 days, I pledge to engage a qualified trainer to lead Heine Bros Coffee Leadership in a Racial Justice, Sensitivity and Diversity training, and commit to embed these practices into the Heine Bros Coffee culture," Mays said.
The about-face from Mays and Heine Bros. earned appreciation from some commenters but left others still saying they would be taking their dollars elsewhere for coffee.
Louisville Showing Up for Racial Justice posted a letter to Mays on its Facebook page Friday in which the group said it was "sincerely disappointed and, honestly, insulted by your recent decision to forbid employees to post signs supporting Black Lives Matter and Justice for Breonna in your stores."
"We are pleased to see that you listened to the public outcry and have reversed this policy," Louisville SURJ told Mays.
The Louisville racial justice group also noted that Heine Bros. has quoted civil rights activist Anne Braden on its coffee cups.
"We know that the woman who said, 'The first task of whites in these struggles is to be vocal and visible' would support a policy that encourages the public declaration that Black Lives Matter," Louisville SURJ told Mays in its letter.
Heine Bros. opened its first coffee shop in the Highlands in 1994 and has since grown to 18 locations around the Louisville area.
$$$
