'Good Trouble' protest ends in over 60 arrests
Bullington, Jonathan; Austin, Emma; Gardner, Hayes; BAILEY LOOSEMORE
26 Aug 2020
A day that some residents feared would be filled with massive protests across Louisville turned out to be peaceful and brief, with a march abruptly ending on a bridge on Tuesday.
Police halted hundreds of demonstrators as they marched across the Central Avenue overpass near Cardinal Stadium after making stops at the Louisville Metro Police's Training Academy and Churchill Downs.
At least 64 people were arrested as of 5:30 p.m., a little more than three hours after the march began. Protesters and police dispersed around 6, and things were still quiet at 7:30. Some protesters said they planned to go to Jefferson Square Park, the scene of frequent rallies.
Others were seen waiting outside Metro Corrections for their peers to be released.
Marchers, both locals and out-of-towners, had converged on Louisville for what organizers called a "Good Trouble Tuesday" protest — a nod to the late civil rights icon and U.S. Rep. John Lewis — that sought to keep pressure on city and state leaders to deliver justice for the March killing of Breonna Taylor.
"All we can do right now is to create change by getting attention and making people aware of what's going on," said Louisville resident Eric Benson, "and then continue to demand that actual systematic change."
The protest capped "BreonnaCon," a four-day event in honor of Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro Police officers fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a search warrant as part of a drug investigation.
The march was organized by New York-based social justice organization Until Freedom, the group behind the July sit-in at Attorney General Daniel Cameron's house at which 87 people were arrested.
Swirling social media rumors leading up to Tuesday's march stoked fear among some in the city, prompted a few businesses and schools to close and led the police department to summon all personnel to be on duty.
People began to gather shortly before 2 p.m. outside Saint Mark AME Church on Euclid Avenue, then headed to South Central Park a block away. About two dozen people, dubbed "marshals," wore neon vests and were tasked with guiding the march.
By 3 p.m., the group, numbering in the hundreds, was on the move, marching half a mile to the LMPD Training Academy on Taylor Boulevard. There, they rearranged letters on a sign outside the building to read: "I see murderers."
Marchers also chanted for Cameron to "do your job." Cameron, who was on the lineup Tuesday night for the Republican National Convention, recently said his office does not expect to make an announcement this week on the case.
The crowd, swelling to roughly 1,000, stayed only a few minutes at the academy before moving to its next stop: Louisville's famed Churchill Downs racetrack, where the Kentucky Derby is planned Sept. 5, albeit without fans.
On Central Avenue, with the track's iconic twin spires in the background, some marchers sat on the hot pavement while others unfurled a purple banner with Taylor's face on it and placed it near the track's gate.
"Ain't no Derby going down unless we get justice," a protester announced over a megaphone.
Meanwhile, a double-file formation of uniformed LMPD officers — numbering at least 50 — approached on a side street.
An officer spoke to one of the marchers, telling her they were free to gather on a public grassy area but those who blocked the street would be arrested.
Protesters did not stay long. They rose from the street and proceeded along the sidewalk to skirt a barricade of LMPD officers and squad cars waiting in the middle of the street.
Several times, protest leaders warned marchers: Those who walked in the street risked arrest. Anyone who didn't want to be arrested should stay on the sidewalk.
Along the Central Avenue overpass, outside Cardinal Stadium, those warnings were realized.
A line of police, some wearing helmets and face shields and carrying wooden batons, stretched across Central Avenue with the overpass railings to their sides.
Officers directed marchers to get out of the street or face arrest. Yet, officers also appeared to block the sidewalk and grassy medium, stopping the group from advancing.
"We're not going to let you come this way," one officer told a marcher, who asked why officers were blocking the public sidewalk. "We have now cordoned this because we have an unlawful assembly. I want to work with you. Tell me what you want to do?"
At the opposite end of Central, officers blocked the roadway but were allowing people to leave via the sidewalk.
Tensions flared as protesters stood inches from officers. Some taunted officers, while others chanted, "We are not the murderers."
One man directed racial slurs at the police, and a woman behind him asked an officer if he was starting to "twitch" as he was berated.
At one point, police strung a yellow crime-scene tape across the roadway and officers and protesters appeared to step back.
Protest organizers told marchers to get off the road if they did not plan on getting arrested.
Those who did not leave sat on the pavement as police officers eventually surrounded them.
After awhile, the protesters who remained confined themselves to the sidewalk, the railing on the overpass only feet behind them.
Among those arrested was Until Freedom co-founders Linda Sarsour and Mysonne Linen. "Real Housewives of Atlanta" star Porsha Williams also was arrested.
At a press conference after the march, LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said 64 people were arrested and booked on charges of obstructing a roadway and disorderly conduct.
"We want to respect the right for people to express their First Amendment rights," Schroeder said, "but we also have to ensure public safety for the whole community and the protesters themselves."
$$$
