No-knock warrants not in Trump order
Aulbach, Lucas
17 June 2020
President Donald Trump signed an executive order Tuesday on police reform, but the edict does not mention no-knock warrants, which have been a major point of contention during protests in Louisville.
Trump authorized the order, which includes deescalation training and bans chokeholds, in an effort to raise professional standards in law enforcement.
Police have faced heated criticism over the controversial deaths of Black people across the nation, including those of George Floyd, who was killed after a Minneapolis officer kneeled on his neck for almost nine minutes, and Breonna Taylor, who was shot and killed by Louisville police executing a no-knock warrant in March at her apartment.
Trump was joined by several law enforcement officials and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell for the signing ceremony in the White House Rose Garden. Trump said McConnell, R-Ky., and fellow GOP Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina are "working on a Senate bill that can go hand in hand with this."
Scott's proposal has not yet been introduced, but he said last week that it would reduce funding for police departments that do not ban chokeholds and, according to The Associated Press, create a database of use-of-force incidents involving police that would prevent officers who are fired from getting hired by other departments.
That bill is a response to Democratic House legislation that includes many measures in the executive order but goes further, taking aim at qualified immunity afforded to police and banning no-knock warrants, which allow officers to enter residences without announcing their presence. (McConnell, for his part, called the House proposal "typical Democratic overreach" that would not advance in the Senate.)
McConnell told reporters after Tuesday's White House ceremony that the Senate bill is a priority and that he planned to release more details Wednesday as to when it could be introduced.
Trump's executive order does not address no-knock warrants — a controversial practice now banned in Louisville that Taylor's lawyers have said was a factor in her death. And while U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth said he supports much of what was included in the edict, the Louisville Democrat said Trump didn't go far enough.
No-knock warrants should be banned in federal drug cases, he told The Courier Journal, and qualified immunity, which protects officers from lawsuits unless the law was clearly broken, should come to an end as well. Both provisions are included in the Democrats' proposal, he said.
Trump's executive order calls on U.S. police departments to improve accountability and transparency and to make a number of other changes to protocol, including:
A ban on chokeholds, unless an officer's life is at risk.
Putting federal money toward providing use-of-force and deescalation training for police.
A push toward developing safer weapons for police to prevent deadly interactions.
A database to track officers credibly accused of abuse, so they aren't rehired by other police departments.
Directing more federal funds toward officers who deal closely with homelessness and individuals with mental and substance abuse issues, and providing more resources for co-responders such as social workers to work with officers.
"We will have reform without undermining our many great and extremely talented law enforcement officers," Trump said. The standards being put in place, he added, are "as high and as strong as there is on Earth."
Yarmuth disagreed with the president's tone at Tuesday's press conference, saying Trump's order was the least he could have done to address concerns of protesters and that he had undermined that by spending much of his address praising law enforcement officials.
But Republicans and Democrats have common ground on this issue, Yarmuth added. He hasn't seen Scott's proposal yet, and it may not go far enough, but what he's heard is included sounds "perfectly reasonable," he said.
Before Tuesday's signing, Trump met with the families of several Black Americans who were killed by police in recent years. Taylor's family was not invited, the family's lawyer told The Courier Journal, and was not in attendance.
Still, her case has reverberated around the nation. Protesters have set up tents at Jefferson Square Park downtown and have been in Louisville's streets every night for weeks. Protests across the U.S. have called for consequences against the officers who shot her.
Louisville's Metro Council voted to ban no-knock warrants last week after Mayor Greg Fischer suspended their use two weeks earlier.
U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, meanwhile, announced on Thursday his intent to draft the "Justice for Breonna Taylor Act," which would ban police from using no-knock warrants nationwide. The bill was introduced later that day.
"After talking with Breonna Taylor's family, I've come to the conclusion that it's long past time to get rid of no-knock warrants," said Paul, Kentucky's junior senator. "This bill will effectively end no-knock raids in the United States."
Some measures included in the executive order mirror those already in place locally. Chokeholds are only allowed under Louisville Metro Police's standard operating procedures in "a situation where the use of deadly force would be allowed." The department does not hire anyone credibly accused of abuse, LMPD spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said, and all officers take part in deescalation education as recruits and as part of their required annual training.
Last week, Gov. Andy Beshear's administration mandated that all law enforcement officials in Kentucky complete an eight-hour course covering bias, use of force, community relationships and other implicit training.
Beshear's office did not respond to a request for comment Tuesday.
$$$
