How we covered a historic 3 months
04 Sep 2020
For 100 days and nights, they have walked the streets of Louisville.
The protesters, the truth-seekers and those demanding justice.
They've challenged our city, if not the entire country, to "say her name," honoring the life of Breonna Taylor while insisting her death will not be in vain.
And for those 14-plus weeks, The Courier Journal's journalists have monitored their marches and chronicled what's unfolded.
We've captured their stories in words, photos and videos. We've shared their energy and exhaustion; the chants and cheers; and the ugliness of vandalism and smoking canisters of chemical irritants. We've recounted the prayers, defiance, camaraderie, anger, sadness and celebration that have underscored these past three months.
Along the way, we've asked tough questions and explored the impact of these protests on downtown businesses and the city's image.
More than anything, however, we've reported the story of a spontaneous movement — uniting men and women of all races and ages — sparked by the death of a 26-year-old Black woman killed by Louisville police in her apartment shortly after midnight March 13.
It's become the story of an unflinching insistence that the days of systemic racism that have hindered generations of Black people in America must end — and we've done our best to reflect it in our news pages and on courierjournal.com as it's happened.
A worn, but revered, cliche in our business defines journalism as the first draft of history.
It's a duty not gone unnoticed by the nearly four dozen Courier Journal staffers who have been part of our protest coverage since May 28.
"I recognize the immense responsibility I and my colleagues have to document this moment in history, knowing that the stories we write will be read by generations that follow," said reporter Jonathan Bullington.
"But I'm also incredibly saddened by the content of those stories, that so many people have had to fight so hard — and have lost so much — for something so basic. I take no joy in telling these stories, only the hope that they can bring about some kind of lasting change."
Our city today is different than it was March 12 — the day before the Taylor shooting. It's also obvious to me we are a different newsroom than we were 100 days ago — beyond the fact we're all working remotely, away from our Broadway newsroom because of the pandemic.
Seeing these protests firsthand, listening to the protesters' stories and learning of their experiences — many of them as victims of systemic racism — have made us more committed to sharing the unvarnished stories of life in Louisville for people of color.
In this heated political climate in our nation's history, too often, those of us in the "mainstream media" are painted in unflattering ways. Our job can be misunderstood or, even worse, recklessly portrayed by politicians chasing voters or by cable network commentators desperate for viewers.
While our work since late May has featured hundreds of protesters, I felt it was important today to also share insights from the staffers in our newsroom who have spent large chunks of time covering the demonstrations and the aftermath of Taylor's shooting. I also want you to know of our commitment to cover this story fairly and completely.
That's important, as reporter Sarah Ladd tells me, "(Because) every journalist, I believe, has a gut desire to find herself in the middle of something historic, something bigger than humanity itself.
"I remember in college, researching how various Kentucky newspapers failed to cover the civil rights movement well. I remember thinking, 'We can never fail like this again.' I'm happy to see we're not. We're covering so many different facets of this movement."
For photographer Sam Upshaw Jr., who grew up in west Louisville, covering the protests has been deeply personal.
"I would often hear stories about the angst and upheaval caused by the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr." he said. "Following his death, a thriving west Louisville business district was destroyed by riots and never recovered.
"I was a child at the time, but over the years, I often wondered what it would be like to cover such a historic moment as a journalist. I never thought I would get the chance until now."
Like Upshaw, Phillip M. Bailey is a Louisville native who knows firsthand the struggles of many West End residents. There's an incentive, he said, for The Courier Journal to "examine what we have done (as a city), what we are doing now and what are we going to do" the next time another Black person dies at the hands of police.
"Being Black and a lifelong West End resident who has never lived east of 40th Street, I knew the weight of this as with other stories about the community I have never left regardless of my professional journey," said Bailey, who is now a USA TODAY political reporter. "I can't promise anyone they'll like what I write or what they read, but I am pursuing the truth as best as possible. That sickle may strike at your beliefs, but pause for a moment and suspend your biases. Please read, think and then speak."
Reporter Ben Tobin was a University of Virginia student in August 2017 when white supremacists and neo-Nazis clutching tiki torches and spewing vile racist and anti-Semitic pejoratives marched in Charlottesville. The next day, a 32-year-old paralegal, Heather Heyer, was killed after a car rammed into a group of protesters near a "Unite the Right" rally in the city.
"In Charlottesville, a movement born out of hatred and intolerance led to the death of an innocent woman," Tobin told me. "By contrast, in Louisville, the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman killed inside her own home, gave birth to a movement focused on vocalizing years of frustration, achieving justice and establishing long-term equity."
Tobin added he has seen "people from school-aged children to senior citizens come together to channel their energy and ensure that their voices are never ignored again."
Education reporter Mandy McLaren has also been touched by the diversity of those people carrying signs, chanting and protesting, often arm in arm.
"From the earliest nights of protests, it was clear that most of the people converging downtown were young — I'm talking teenagers. So, as someone who has spent three years covering this city's youth, I tried to bring that lens to my protest coverage," she said. "I wanted to make sure our coverage treated them seriously and, as much as possible, gave voice to their experience in this moment."
That inspired McLaren to examine the passion of Louisville's youth who were on the streets, demanding justice.
Bailey Loosemore was among the first Courier Journal staffers to cover the marches. She was there May 28, the first night of protests, when a demonstration turned violent as seven people were shot near Sixth and Jefferson streets.
"That first night, I witnessed a lot of anger and pain I had known existed but I'd never seen so clearly. It made me realize as a reporter, part of my responsibility is to make sure other people can understand and recognize those emotions, even if they don't experience them in person," she said.
It's also been a time of self-reflection for Loosemore.
"Through the protests, I've had to think hard about my ignorance and lack of knowledge about experiences faced by so many Black people and people of color. And I've come to better appreciate the power I have as a member of the media," she said. "I'll never fully understand the weight of being a Black person in our society. But I'm so thankful that I'm in a job that allows me to educate myself and others every day."
Reporters from across our newsroom, including the sports department, have assisted with our coverage. Cameron Teague Robinson typically covers the University of Louisville football team. In the spring, he was tracking the protesters and the conversations they were sparking among athletes.
He spoke with Jamon Brown, a former Louisville player now in the NFL, who said he was discussing race and inclusion "because he's more than an athlete," Robinson said.
"He's a Black man and a human first," he told me. "That stood out just because people always consider celebrities or athletes as people who aren't impacted by this — but they are."
Fellow sportswriter Hayes Gardner joined our protest coverage on day 19 and acknowledged, "I wasn't prepared for what was to come."
"I was writing a story on college basketball that morning when I learned I'd be switching to the protests, so it was pretty jarring to be running from pepper balls that evening and trying to figure out if it was tear gas that had been deployed or another chemical agent," he said. "Needing to wash my face mask because it had pepper spray in it is not something I imagined I'd have to do multiple times this year."
For Olivia Krauth, covering the protests comes with many responsibilities — and occasional pressure.
"On the ground and in the moment, sometimes with tear gas and smoke in the air, it can be difficult to ascertain just how large this movement is," she said.
"It is especially tricky because you want to explain what you're seeing, put it in context, weigh your words — particularly as a white reporter — and do it quickly for a national audience. I constantly felt a weight to understand in the moment how big this is, and I still don't think I've fully wrapped my mind around how monumental what I witnessed was."
Several of the journalists involved in the story have acknowledged they were intimidated, if not outright scared, especially the first weekend when there were clashes between police and protesters.
"The protests were the most emotionally draining thing I've ever covered in my life," said sports analyst Dominique Yates. "The uncertainty of what might happen kept me on edge. I'll never forget the pain of being hit by tear gas three times in one night. I don't wish that on anyone.
"I'm thankful," Yates continued, "that every time I went out there, I was able to call my family and let them know I made it home safe. It hurts me to know that not everyone has been able to do that. As a Black man, I can feel the pain that those in the community feel. Even though it was difficult, professionally, I can appreciate the fact that I will forever be a part of history. It's stories I will tell for the rest of my life."
Michael Clevenger is 23-year veteran of The Courier Journal who has called Louisville home since 1972. He attended Male High School and the University of Kentucky.
He is preparing for his favorite assignment of the year: snapping images from Churchill Downs at Saturday's Kentucky Derby.
Clevenger says he's been asked often if he's ready for things in his hometown to "return to normal."
"It's always a hard question to answer," he said. "What people want to know is if I'd like to things to go back to the way they were. The answer is 'no.' I don't want things to go back to 'normal.'
"Normal is something that worked best for people who look like me. What is and was normal for me doesn't work for some people in my city. That's not OK. Things in Louisville feel broken right now and that's hard for me. Louisville is my home and my home is hurting. My hope is that, when we do get back to 'normal,' we have become a new city. A city that becomes the new standard for how we relate to each other. A new standard in how we treat those who are marginalized.
"I'd love to see Louisville become the model for how to do this."
We all do, Michael.
In the meantime, you can count on The Courier Journal to cover this story from all angles for the next 100 days — and beyond.
Thanks for supporting our journalists with your subscriptions and loyal readership.
The critical work we do wouldn't happen without your support.
Stay healthy and thanks for reading The Courier Journal.
Rick Green is our editor and can be reached at rgreen@courierjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter: @KentuckyRAG.
Richard A. Green
Editor
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Breonna Taylor coverage
It's been virtually impossible to miss The Courier Journal's coverage of the Breonna Taylor protests these past 100 days.
An analysis of our work shows we've produced more than 475 articles (stories, editorials and columns) dealing with the Taylor case, its investigation, the shooting of barbecue operator David McAtee and the protesters.
We've shot and produced nearly 80 videos that have been viewed 1.1 million times since Taylor's death. Another 1.2 million views have come from those flipping through our photo galleries.
One particular story published June 16 — the Taylor fact-check story that debunks some myths or often-repeated errors related to the case — has especially resonated with readers. It has earned more than 650,000 page views from more than 540,000 unique visitors. We know there is national interest in this story from readers who actively are searching for clear answers to what really happened to her shortly after midnight March 13 in her Louisville apartment. We are working hard to deliver credible, factual journalism to address the disinformation in this highly publicized story.
At this writing, I am proud that we've logged nearly 9 million views from almost 5 million digital readers on more than 500 pieces of content we've created on just courierjournal.com.
This week, we also launched a new Breonna Taylor weekly newsletter, authored by reporters Tessa Duvall and Darcy Costello. You can sign up for it here: profile.courier-journal.com/newsletters/the-breonna-taylor-case.
It's clear we are covering a generational story that has very strong roots in our city.
Our commitment to the Breonna Taylor story goes far beyond the numbers; well beyond the bylines you see.
I'd love to hear your thoughts, questions or suggestions about our coverage.
Feel free to email me at rgreen@courierjournal.com.
A lone protester sits in the middle of Central Avenue during an August protest seeking justice for Breonna Taylor. More than 400 people protested and dozens were arrested.
matt Stone/Courier Journal
Organizers rally a crowd of protesters on May 28 at the intersection of Sixth and Jefferson streets in downtown Louisville. They sought to raise awareness of Taylor's death.
$$$
