COVID-19, protest damage halt hotel reopenings
Schneider, Grace
13 June 2020
Louisville's once-booming hotel sector tried to awaken from weeks of slumber after coronavirus clampdowns lightened up last month, but damage inflicted during recent protests and a forecast for weak demand have forced several innkeepers to postpone reopening plans — again.
The fact that the Kentucky Derby Festival, postponed from April to August, has canceled its main events, only added another gut punch.
Two of the city's biggest downtown hotels — the Omni and Marriott — confirmed this week they won't open until midsummer or later.
Another large hotelier, White Lodging, also will keep two smaller downtown properties — Hotel Distil and Hotel Moxy — closed and let demand for rooms dictate the pace for reboots.
The operators of 21c Museum Hotel on Main Street have set July 1 to open the doors, along with the upscale restaurant Proof on Main, which will start by serving only dinners for a time.
Hotel operators seemed resigned to more struggles through a summer in which concerts, weddings, conventions, family reunions and company meetings have been erased from the 2020 calendar or pushed into the fall.
Meanwhile, the phased reopening of the economy still isn't bringing back leisure visitors who tend to reserve lodging about a week or two before a trip, said Scott Stuckey, the Omni's general manager. "We haven't seen a positive sign yet with people traveling."
Hotels and the nation's broader leisure travel and tourism industry were slammed in March when the pandemic triggered stay-at-home orders and forced businesses to close temporarily. The cascade of cancellations dried up hotel bookings and forced dozens of properties to suspend operations and furlough workers.
The Omni and Marriott were still closed late last month when protests erupted over the death of Breonna Taylor, the unarmed black woman who was fatally shot in her home during a March 13 police raid.
Looters and vandals, taking advantage of crowds gathered for otherwise peaceful demonstrations, smashed windows and hauled off booze, jewelry and other merchandise.
A replica of Colonel Sanders, on loan from Yum Brands, was stolen from Louisville Tourism's downtown welcome center on Fourth Street, along with monitors, video screens and T-shirts. The break-in occurred after the center had finished a $70,000 renovation, spokeswoman Stacey Yates said.
Dozens of small shops, restaurants and the CVS pharmacy on Fourth Street at Muhammad Ali also were hit hard. At the Omni, about 28 large custom plate-glass windows were broken, and big dings in another 15 or so led to five-figure repair bills, Stuckey said.
All of White Lodging's properties received some damage, as well, spokesman Mike Banas said in an email.
"We're looking at returning some of our other hotels, including Distil and Moxy, to operations in mid-summer, which could accelerate or be pushed back based on demand," he said.
The company kept its Homewood Suites, on West Market Street, open during the pandemic to serve essential workers and other travelers. Traffic there and at Aloft, on West Main Street, which also remained open, Banas said, has started to pick up some.
White Lodging is weighing a plan to open restaurants Repeal and Bitters End on Whiskey Row before the hotels opens, he said.
The upshot for the Omni is that a planned July 1 opening has to be delayed a month because it will take at least five weeks to manufacture the custom glass panels, and several more days to install them, Stuckey said.
"The positive thing is we just had broken windows. The rest of the hotel is fine."
The forecast is cloudy for when guests will start to return in significant numbers. A data service that tracks hotel occupancy rates showed that during a recent 28-day stretch, bigger downtown operations, including the Brown, Hilton, Hyatt and Galt House, had averaged around 4%, he said.
That's compared with rates of more than 60% during a normal late spring and early summer.
Among the conventions that were set for this summer, some organizers have been on the phone with the Omni team trying to figure out whether they might scale back their plans instead of canceling altogether.
One driver: Sponsors, suppliers and other companies that support conventions and trade shows have been hammered by the pandemic, Stuckey said he's been told, so that's slashed budgets and forced conventions to plan for half of the attendees they'd normally host.
A convention for 500 people might draw 250 later this summer, he said, but that's better than none at all.
A bit of upbeat news surfaced this week, and hotels in the outlying areas are likely to benefit most. The Street Rod Nationals confirmed their convention at the Kentucky Exposition Center at the Fairgrounds will be held Aug. 6-9.
Since it's ranked as one of the area's top 10 events for economic impact, that's a big lift, Yates said.
Damage done to hotels has owners pushing back reopening plans further.
$$$
