What can be done about danger created at Jefferson Square Park?
Duvall, Tessa; Costello, Darcy; Gardner, Hayes
02 July 2020
City officials say before the shooting, they had sought to strike a balance in the park between respecting peaceful protest and preserving public safety.
Jefferson Square Park had been decorated with signs and chalk art for weeks. Fresh plants ornamented its concrete flower beds, and a massive banner emblazoned with Breonna Taylor's name hung between two poles.
As the epicenter of Louisville's protests seeking justice for Taylor over the past month, the park has become a home base for demonstrators demanding racial justice.
But it has also become a volatile focal point of simmering tensions between angry protesters who believe change isn't coming quickly enough and frustrated police officers.
And on Saturday night, it became a homicide scene when 27-year-old Tyler Gerth was shot dead by what protesters and police say was an agitated and disturbed demonstrator who unleashed a volley of gunfire inside the park.
After the death, the city cleared the park, trashing some protesters' tents, and banned overnight camping, but protesters are already returning and promising to remain – planting placards declaring "You can't police our park" and "Open for tents."
The fragile detente between both sides is fraying, leaving the park's immediate future even more unsettled and uncertain.
"Things would probably be easier if we were to move, but I believe that we should stay," said 19-year old protester Kenna Mink, "because us moving is giving them what they want. And that's something that we just shouldn't be doing.
"If they're not giving us what we want, why would we give them (what they want)?"
City officials say before the shooting, they had sought to strike a balance in the park between respecting peaceful protest and preserving public safety. But some police told The Courier Journal that the gatherings became a "red flag" long before Saturday's shooting and they question its safety.
Louisville Metro Councilwoman Keisha Dorsey, D-3rd District, said Jefferson Square Park – renamed Injustice Square Park by many activists – was a trusted space for the community, a watering hole of sorts.
"It was an essential meeting spot where you can synergize and energize and put folks on one page," Dorsey said. "When you disrupt that, you get what you get at that point because you've destroyed the means in which people can collaborate."
'We ain't going anywhere' Amy Hess, chief of public safety for the city, said the camp needed to be cleared after the shooting because it had become a "safety issue at this point."
In nights leading to Saturday, she described "increasingly dangerous behavior," including fistfights and a growing number of weapons.
Until that point, the city had been trying to balance First Amendment protections – "the need to be able to come together and demand change – with the need to provide for public safety and enforce laws, like the camping ordinance," Hess said.
"That became out of balance," Hess said Sunday. "We saw a need ... to take action."
Similarly, police in Seattle on Wednesday converged on the city's protest zone, making arrests and sweeping through streets that demonstrators had occupied for weeks.
There have been at least two fatal shootings there in recent weeks, and police say other shootings, robberies and violence have occurred since protesters first took over the "Capitol Hill Occupied Protest," or "CHOP."
Seattle Police Chief Carmen Best said she supports peaceful protests but "enough is enough. The CHOP has become lawless and brutal."
Whether Louisville officials have acted too quickly or too slowly to keep Jefferson Square Park from becoming lawless depends on who you ask.
Tyra Walker, co-chair of Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, said increased weaponry in the park – spurred by the threat of armed counterprotesters – did not play a role in Saturday's shooting.
"I do not feel like it is dangerous," Walker said. "It was an isolated incident."
Protesters who returned to the park Sunday and Monday, dropping off cases of water, food, signs and a reconstructed memorial to Taylor, say they feel compelled to stay.
"We can't leave. Look, right there, it's Breonna Taylor's memorial. We can't leave," said protester Montez Jones. "We ain't going anywhere."
But police and some city officials have questioned why the city had previously chosen not to enforce the city ordinance against camping – which has been used to clear out tents at past demonstrations.
One LMPD officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he wasn't authorized to talk to the media, stressed that police support protesters exercising First Amendment rights and having their voices heard, even if they don't agree with the message.
The frustration for officers, he said, has been with "violence that has ensued and the decision-making that has led to violent scenarios." He said that city leaders have been warned for days, if not weeks, of increasing danger in Jefferson Square Park since people began to sleep there overnight.
"As soon as the tents started coming in, the red flags were getting waved," he said.
He questioned whether the command staff and mayor's office's reluctance to clear the park early on, before Saturday's shooting, was for political expediency.
"I get it, you don't want to come off as heavy-handed," he added. "But sometimes, you've got to be the parent, so to speak, and not the friend. If you don't, someone's going to end up getting hurt."
'Failed by faulty leadership' Ex-police officers and the state FOP have taken particular issue with what they say was an order interim Chief Robert Schroeder gave Sunday night for officers to remove helmets and gear before moving in to clear out protesters who remained in Jefferson Square Park.
That command, they say, would have put officers in harm's way.
"Asking our officers to remove their protective equipment for the sake of public image is absolutely shameful and unsafe!" state FOP President Berl Perdue wrote in a statement posted to Facebook.
Perdue's blistering statement, which says that LMPD has "yet again been failed by faulty leadership," goes on to state that the order to remove riot gear and helmets came after people with "long rifles and scopes were removed from nearby parking garages."
Jessie Halladay, a spokeswoman for LMPD, confirmed Monday that two men with long guns were spotted on top of a hotel parking garage downtown just before 11 p.m. SWAT team members went to investigate.
The men's guns were taken temporarily and they were asked to leave the garage, but they weren't charged because they hadn't committed a crime, she said.
George Rodman, a former LMPD officer who recently organized a rally in support of police, posted on Facebook that officers ordered to clear the park without helmets were "threatened with suspension" if they didn't comply.
"Their idea of a bull--- soft-approach command is uncalled for, especially with unknown snipers on the roof!" Rodman said. "My opinion is it's time to STAND UP for yourself! NOW! Everyone together! ... It's obvious this Dept (sic) and Fischer don't give two s---- about your well being!!"
Halladay, however, told The Courier Journal that characterization is inaccurate. Schroeder didn't order officers to remove helmets, she said, he just decided that LMPD would be taking a "soft approach" in clearing the park.
On Tuesday, a "number" of LMPD officers in the Third Division called in sick to work, though some later reported for duty. And on Wednesday morning, roughly 27 officers called in sick.
'There's going to be death' Metro Council members, too, have pressed the administration, calling on Fischer to equally enforce existing laws and expressing frustration at how some protesters' belongings were mishandled. Fischer has since apologized.
"If there's no camping allowed and someone starts to camp, stop them. If someone's protesting on the sidewalk, don't bother them. How difficult is that?" asked Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, a frequent Fischer critic who is spearheading an investigation into how the mayor's office has handled the Taylor case and police response to protesters.
When it comes to enforcing the law, he added, "do so in a compassionate and reasonable way. Don't go in force or hurt anybody or do anything that's unnecessary. But you can't choose when to enforce the law and when not to, because then you open up a whole other can of worms."
Councilwoman Paula McCraney, D-7th, too, said it's important the city doesn't allow "lawless behavior" to take place as it allows peaceful protests to continue.
"Whenever you allow people to break the law, it never ends well," she said. "And anytime there's a group of people who you say you're there to protect and serve, but yet you don't do that? And you allow lawless behavior in the midst of that?
"There's going to be death and there's going to be trouble. And that's unfortunate. Whoever's making those calls should come forward and step aside."
Taylor's death 'set off a bomb' Asked if the park had become unsafe, Hannah Drake, a local writer and activist, answered with questions of her own.
"I think it's unsafe to be a 26-year-old in your own home and be shot dead by the police," Drake said, referring to Taylor's March 13 death. "So, I mean, do they want to discuss that? Do they want that conversation?"
Drake said racism does not exist in a vacuum, and as such the deaths of Taylor, David McAtee and Gerth are now all directly connected to the no-knock search warrant that led police to Taylor's apartment.
After protests roiled downtown Louisville in final days of May, Gov. Andy Beshear called in the National Guard on May 30. On June 1, McAtee, 53, was fatally shot by a Guard member who had been called in to disperse a crowd on West Broadway.
Police have said McAtee was firing a gun before he was killed. But an attorney for McAtee's family say the police's conduct, firing pepper balls at fleeing people, may have provoked the outcome.
"All of this is a tragedy," she said. "What happened to Breonna, which should not have happened, set off a bomb in this city, and people are still, because of that incident, dying 'til this day. Something that happened, all the way in March, has now impacted (Gerth's) entire family."
The reason people took to the park in the first place is because the system is "out of balance" for Black Americans, Dorsey said, using Hess' words.
"It's very difficult to pick and choose when we want to use rules to protect and serve when those same rules can be used to suppress and oppress," Dorsey said. "That to me is the finer balance of understanding and making sure that we are picking and choosing how we enforce that concept. And it's that principle as to why people are in the streets. It is the reason why people in the west are policed different than people in the east, and we know it."
Dorsey and Drake both say the city forbidding people from being in the park overnight won't end the movement. If anything, people will dig in more, they said.
"This is what the city doesn't understand, and what this nation is kind of getting a whiff of, that we're tired," Drake said. "It's not going to end, because you cannot continue to abuse people and think we're just going to continue to put up with it. ... Now, I protest in the name of Breonna, David and Tyler, because he was a victim of this."
Drake added: "We don't just quit now; we fight even harder because he didn't have to die."
City officials say before the shooting, they had sought to strike a balance in the park between respecting peaceful protest and preserving public safety.
Protests fired up following the vigil Sunday at Jefferson Square Park for Tyler Gerth, who was shot at the site the night before. Amy Hess, chief of public safety for the city, said the camp needed to be cleared after the shooting because it had become a "safety issue at this point."
$$$
