Are protesters' charges appropriate or 'overblown'?
Kobin, Billy; Costello, Darcy
16 July 2020
Tuesday's protest outside Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's East End Louisville home and the resulting 87 arrests certainly garnered attention.
For one thing, civil rights leaders, athletes and celebrities were among those handcuffed as protesters in Cameron's front yard called for him to charge three police officers in the killing of Breonna Taylor, a Black woman who was fatally shot as they executed a warrant at her apartment March 13.
But what also raised some eyebrows was that the detained protesters were charged with intimidating a participant in the legal process — a Class D felony in Kentucky.
"This is an overblown, outrageous, and inappropriate reaction to a community that is rightfully upset with govt delay in holding the police accountable," the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky tweeted Tuesday night. "The only purpose these charges serve is to potentially chill the free speech rights of protesters #JusticeForBreonna."
The protest was organized by Until Freedom, a national social justice organization. Linda Sarsour, one of the group's co-founders arrested outside Cameron's home, said that while protesters "did absolutely trespass," the felony charge is an "intimidation tactic."
The felony intimidation charge carries a punishment of one to five years in prison, a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, or both.
Louisville Metro Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said Wednesday that police "commanders on the ground" made the decision on the charges.
"The felony charge is based on protesters trespassing onto the Attorney General's property, refusing to leave and chanting that if they didn't get what they want they would burn it down," she said in a statement. "That was deemed an attempt to intimidate, persuade or influence the Attorney General's decision."
"If we don't get it, shut it down" is a common chant of protesters. On Tuesday, they replaced part of the phrase with "burn it down."
Halladay's statement follows one made Tuesday evening by LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington saying that the protesters "chose to occupy the front yard of a home owned by the Kentucky Attorney General and continuously chant towards he and his neighbors."
"At his request, they were trespassed from the property. All were given the opportunity to leave, were told that remaining on the property would be unlawful, and chose not to leave," Washington said.
Cameron, a Republican who serves as Kentucky's chief law enforcement officer, is overseeing his office's investigation into the shooting of Taylor, 26, as police executed a search warrant related to a drug investigation at her apartment. No drugs were recovered from her home.
Demonstrators have called for Cameron to charge the three officers involved in the shooting — Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove.
Interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder terminated Hankison on June 23, writing that his use of deadly force was improper. Hankison has appealed the firing. Mattingly and Cosgrove have been placed on administrative reassignment.
In response to the protest at his house in Graymoor-Devondale, Cameron said Tuesday that "justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property, and it's not achieved through escalation."
"It's achieved by examining the facts in an impartial and unbiased manner," Cameron said. "That is exactly what we are going to do in this investigation."
On Monday, Cameron said he still has no timeline for when his office will conclude its investigation of the Taylor case. But if charges are brought, his office would prosecute the case.
Those arrested at his home included Minneapolis NAACP President Leslie Redmond, Houston Texans wide receiver Kenny Stills, reality TV stars Porsha Williams and Yandy Smith, rappers Trae Tha Truth and YBN Cordae, and the various co-founders of Until Freedom.
Besides the intimidation charges, the protesters face charges of second-degree disorderly conduct (a Class B misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days in jail and a maximum $250 fine if convicted) and third-degree criminal trespass (a misdemeanor violation punishable by a maximum $250 fine, if convicted). The lesser charges are in line with what many others who have been arrested at other Louisville protests over the past few weeks have faced.
A spokeswoman for the Jefferson County Attorney's Office said Wednesday the office was "not involved in the charging decisions."
"We will review all available facts and evidence and proceed on a case by case basis," Ingrid Geiser, the director of the criminal division, wrote in an email.
Cameron spokeswoman Elizabeth Kuhn said: "We respect the decisions made by the arresting agency and appreciate their assistance in upholding the law. Ultimately, any charges will be subject to the legal process and further review by prosecutors."
In an emailed statement, Corey Shapiro, the ACLU of Kentucky's legal director, wrote that the only purpose the felony charges serve is to "potentially chill the free speech rights of the protesters."
Criminal laws, Shapiro said, should not be used to suppress political speech, and protesters should be free to express political views without fear of arrest based on their speech. And, if they "engage in peaceful civil disobedience, the charges should be consistent with their peaceful actions."
"Applying inappropriate felony charges on peaceful demonstrators is an abuse of power and should be condemned, particularly by Attorney General Cameron," Shapiro added. "As an elected official, the Attorney General will always be subject to public criticism, some of which may be uncomfortable. But that doesn't mean such criticism should be criminalized."
Louisville Metro Councilman Bill Hollander, D-9th District, told The Courier Journal he hoped the courts would look very carefully about what "physical force or threats were made," referencing the statute.
"We should be very, very reluctant to charge people with felonies for intimidating public officials, when they're asking for public officials to take some action," Hollander said.
Hayes Gardner contributed to this report. Reach Billy Kobin: bkobin@courierjournal.com. Reach Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello.
Intimidating a participant in the legal process
In Kentucky, the charge of intimidating a participant in the legal process is a Class D felony.
If found guilty, persons facing the charge can face one to five years in prison, a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, or both.
Under Kentucky statutes, a person is guilty of intimidating a participant in the legal process "when, by use of physical force or a threat directed to a person he believes to be a participant in the legal process, he or she" does at least one of several things, such as:
Influences, or attempts to influence, the testimony, vote, decision or opinion of that person.
Induces, or attempts to induce, that person to withhold a record, document or other object from an official proceeding.
Hinders, delays or prevents the communication to a law enforcement officer or judge of information relating to the possible commission of an offense or a violation of conditions of probation, parole or release pending judicial proceedings.
The statute on the felony charge also mentions how an "official proceeding need not be pending or about to be instituted at the time of the offense," and the "testimony, record, document, or other object need not be admissible in evidence or free of a claim of privilege."
Finally, the statute says that in order for a person to be convicted of the felony, "the act against a participant in the legal process or the immediate family of a participant in the legal process shall be related to the performance of a duty or role played by the participant in the legal process."
$$$
