New Louisville mural honors Floyd, Taylor
Eadens, Savannah
16 June 2020
"They should never have been killed and we'll never forget them."
Ed Hamilton
Sculpture artist describing George Floyd
and Breonna Taylor, whose images were painted
on his building by artist Damon Thompson
For nine hours on a recent Sunday, artist Damon Thompson emptied can after can of spray paint as he focused intently on the facial features of two people whose deaths have sparked a growing movement for change across the country.
On the facade of prolific Louisville sculptor Ed Hamilton's studio at the corner of 500 S. Shelby Street, Thompson measured the new mural precisely, hoping the portrait would be out of reach from any future vandalism.
The next morning, he returned for an hour to add the final details. Their names.
George Floyd. Breonna Taylor.
Normally, Thompson tries to create portraits so recognizable he doesn't need to include the subject's name.
But protests in dozens of cities across the country since the deaths of Floyd in Minneapolis and Taylor in Louisville have been dominated by chants of "Say his name" and "Say her name."
"I try to be as matter of fact about getting the paintings right on a technical level, but it would occasionally as I was working hit me just how tragic ... the situation is," Thompson said.
A Louisville native and graffiti artist, Thompson has created more than 40 murals in Louisville and Southern Indiana since March when he was laid off from his job as the COVID-19 pandemic took its toll.
Before the portrait of Floyd and Taylor, he painted one of the iconic musician Prince just across the street on the side of a building facing Hamilton's studio in Shelby Park.
When Hamilton wanted a mural on his property, Thompson suggested a portrait of the esteemed sculptor, who's known for his works depicting historic African American figures like Booker T. Washington and Martin Luther King Jr. His sculptures have dominated exhibits at the Speed Art Museum and Frazier History Museum over the decades. One of his public works, "Spirit of Freedom," a tribute to the Colored Soldiers and Sailors of the Civil War, is a national memorial in Washington, D.C.
But Hamilton said he wasn't concerned with his own legacy. He wanted to pay tribute to Taylor "because she is so beautiful."
"I was blown away when I saw it," Hamilton said, choking up.
"Her smiling face, oh Lord. I broke down."
The sculptor said dozens of people are stopping by daily to take photos of the mural.
"Now we got two figures who are going to change the world and hopefully change the way policing is done," Hamilton said. "That's what murals do — they keep reminding you of these events and the people that are part of these movements. They should never have been killed and we'll never forget them."
Hamilton said he hopes Taylor's family will come admire the mural.
Thompson also painted a mural of David McAtee, a Louisville man who owned a barbecue restaurant in the West End and who was shot and killed by the Kentucky National Guard in an incident June 1.
That portrait, an up-close profile of McAtee, was sitting outside The Limbo, a tiki bar at 411 W. Chestnut St. that was damaged during protests in downtown Louisville on May 29 and 30. Now it sits at the home of McAtee's mother, Odessa, who lives in the West End. She was overjoyed by the painting, Thompson said, and wanted to hang it above her stairs, but it was too large.
"My No. 1 takeaway from this is just how incredibly lucky I am to be able to contribute in any way to the greatest civil rights movement in history and to even play a small role in this," Thompson said.
His wife is immunocompromised after surviving a breast cancer battle, so Thompson hasn't been able to attend the protests in the streets of Louisville during the past two weeks.
"But there seems to be no shortage of young hearts and minds putting themselves on the front lines, so this alleviates a little bit of my guilt and shame at not being out in the streets with them," he said.
Thompson's murals join other recent additions to Louisville's public art scene.
A mural in the 700 block of East Broadway covers a boarded-up storefront. On it, Lady Liberty, peppered with Black Lives Matter symbols, cries and lowers her beacon as the scales of justice weigh the death of a black man and a loaded pistol. Silhouettes of protesters stand in the corner with a sign that says "Change."
It was created by artist Wilfred E. Sieg III from the Art Cartel, collective for creators of "thought-provoking and visually stimulating" public art. Sieg is known for several projects around Louisville, including a mural on the exterior of Joe Ley's Antiques and most recently, a mural on Petro Towery at 813 Finzer St., commissioned through Fund for the Arts 2019 Mural Festival.
For Hamilton, the murals are a reminder that public art is more than just a vibrant way to change a city's landscape. It's a catalyst for change.
"We just want to keep them in our thoughts and memories and visually not let them die," he said.
Reach Savannah Eadens at seadens@courierjournal.com or 502-381-9498.
"They should never have been killed and we'll never forget them."
Ed Hamilton
Sculpture artist describing George Floyd
and Breonna Taylor, whose images were painted
on his building by artist Damon Thompson
A woman pauses Thursday to look at a mural painted on a boarded-up storefront on east Broadway depicting racial injustice in Louisville.
$$$
