What is Kentucky's AG doing, anyway?
21 July 2020
Why are unarmed Black protesters, asking only for transparency and justice for the Louisville Metro Police Department's killing of an innocent woman, charged with felonies when they sit in the state attorney general's yard, while aggressive, white, armed protesters hanging the governor in effigy after banging on his door are charged with exactly nothing?Why is the attorney general fighting against public health mandates in a pandemic? Why is he not instead resolving a 4-month-old case where the killers have been known since March 13?I am distressed that our attorney general is more concerned with political leverage and intimidation than with the health of his fellow Kentuckians or with the application of justice for Breonna Taylor.The attorney general would preserve for Kentuckians only the rights to be afraid for our lives when we leave our homes thanks to unchecked COVID-19 contagion, afraid for our lives when we peacefully petition our government for redress thanks to the application of intimidating felony charges, and afraid for our lives when we are at home thanks to the right of the Louisville Metro Police Department to execute baseless warrants without consequences. I hope other state and city institutions will check the AG's headlong rush into the dangerous world he is advocating for.
Emma Aprile
Louisville, 40204
Equal justice or double standard? Let me get this straight, 87 peaceful protesters were arrested for trespassing on the attorney general's property in Louisville. While people carrying AK-47s and much more firepower went onto the Governor's Mansion property, and no one was arrested! Does that seem like equal justice to you? There just may be a double standard here!
Dennis Steier
Louisville, 40218
A stunning contrast As a resident of Graymoor Devondale, I'm not accustomed to having LMPD show up in full military-style gear with assault vehicles and helicopters as their backup in my neighborhood. The comparison of the LMPD response to Tuesday's protest at the home of Mitch McConnell's protege, Attorney General Daniel Cameron, and the assault they instigated against Breonna Taylor in her home is stunning. Cameron stated "... goal of today's protest at my home was to 'escalate.' That is not acceptable and only serves to further division and tension within our community. Justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property, and it's not achieved through escalation. It's achieved by examining the facts in an impartial and unbiased manner ..." What if Breonna Taylor had been approached with an impartial and unbiased manner with thoughtful examination of the facts? She would still be alive today.
Karen Newton
Louisville, 40242
Reconnecting Black Kentuckians to Land Thank you for the article on Black farming and Travis Cleaver his family. It was enlightening to know that Kentucky Black farmers have avenues of assistance and support available to them. It is an industry that can be lucrative for them and their families, too! Also, Black soil, housed in Lexington, is a great business catalyst for Kentucky's Black farmers, too.
Claudia S. Geurin
Louisville, 40291
Police must bear criticism I am deeply disturbed that Louisville police charged Justice-for-Breona-Taylor protesters at the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron with a class D felony for interfering with a law officer. If law enforcement and justice officials want to be part of the solution — not the problem — they need to demonstrate sound judgment. We have seen too much I'll-show-you-whose-in-charge retribution of late. Yes, protesters' chants can be alarming and protesters can spill off the public sidewalk onto private property. Elected officials and public servants, however, must learn to bear criticism. After all, they are allowed to use weapons such as battering rams and live ammunition on private property against private citizens. The public has a right to demand that law and justice officers demonstrate the same restraint they demand of protesters.
Barbara Bennett
Owensboro, Ky. 42303
Is a prom really that necessary? I couldn't believe my eyes when I opened the Metro section and there, in full color, were 200 kids at a New Albany High School prom! Hanging all over each other in full prom style, no masks, no social distancing, just good old-fashioned prom fun. Then I read that the dance was put on by a few parents who wanted to give the seniors their rite of passage. I wonder, as a few weeks passes, and some of those kids get sick with COVID-19, will these parents still feel that the prom was really that necessary? When their child is in ICU with tubes coming from their body will those prom memories fade? Have they not read that the curve is going up and we're not in the clear yet? Yes, some things are important like proms, but other things are more important such as human life. And you only get one of those!
Natalie Dugan
Louisville, 40205
CJ coverage of unsanctioned 'prom' Worse than the behavior of the parents who organized the recent unsanctioned "prom" for New Albany High School students was The Courier Journal's coverage of the event. Not a single word of criticism could be found in the text surrounding the color photo spread. Anybody heard of social distancing? Where were the masks? What ignorant irresponsible parents conceived this? Ignoring the prohibition of NAHS administrators, the organizers even went rogue and used NAHS in the event title. Let's hope no one falls ill from this stupid stunt. Maybe next time your reporter will take just a few lines to point out the thoughtless risk such large (200-person) events pose to health-compromised friends and relatives.
R. M. Zur Schmiede
Kingston , WA 98346
Protesters raise their fists outside the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron on July 14. Around 200 people, organized by the group Until Freedom, marched from Ballard High School up Herr Lane to Cameron's neighborhood, chanting Breonna Taylor's name as well as calling for justice for her killing.
$$$
