Damage 'horrible' for small businesses
Gardner, Hayes
10 June 2020
Mi Casita was one of many businesses that had to adapt in March when the coronavirus pandemic caused a national economic shutdown.
Then, the downtown Mexican restaurant, shortly after reopening its doors to socially distanced diners, had to shutter its glass windows with wooden boards in recent days as looters have damaged property at many Louisville businesses, separate from the peaceful protests of the death of Breonna Taylor, who was killed by Louisville police officers in March.
For small business owners, it's been a grueling one-two punch: months of closure or altered operation due to the coronavirus, and then property damage on top of it.
"It's crazy," said Miguel Hernandez, owner of Mi Casita downtown.
Already floundering amid the coronavirus, Hernandez sensed mayhem on the evening of May 28, and so he went to his restaurant to prevent any damage from looters. He spent that night and the next three nights at the restaurant — until 4 a.m. each day, he said — waving off would-be vandals and preventing damage until someone fired an airsoft gun at a window on the night of May 31, leaving a noticeable mark.
That startled him, and he paid to install boards over his entire storefront, including a mobile board over the door, allowing the restaurant to stay open. It's a cost he wasn't planning for, but it's better than the alternative: paying thousands of dollars for new glass doors or windows. To board up a storefront and install new glass generally costs $2500 at a minimum, but can often climb to $10,000 or more.
It's substantial, and it's why Hernandez was so vigilant in fending off damage late last month.
"I don't wanna lose more money, man," said Hernandez, who is now acting as a cook in order to cut costs. "Believe me, this is horrible."
Down the street, Fadi Faouri of VIP Smoke Shop and Gifts fought off bands of looters with a high-powered rifle during the first weekend of protests. He said that was just the latest threat to his livelihood since March.
"We have the coronavirus and now this," Faouri said last week. "My numbers are worse than (during) COVID."
With much of downtown, including the nearby Omni Hotel, closed during the virus outbreak, sales declined dramatically. He's been forced to pay bills with his credit cards, and now they're maxed out. He's not sure how much longer he can hang on financially.
It may be weeks, not months now, he said.
The damage has been felt by business owners across the city.
On a typical busy day, Stanley Schultze & Co glass company writes 10 or 15 work orders, but on May 30, it wrote more than 50, and that demand continued throughout the week as business after business called with damaged windows and interior glass.
Manager Mark Johnson said that the phone hasn't stopped ringing since May 28, and many of his employees worked 16-hour days last week.
"What happened was like nothing we could've imagined," said Johnson, who has never seen so much demand in his five years in the business. "My jaw drops every time."
The glass company has faced a shortage of glass, having to constantly pick up more from distributors, and has made multiple trips each day to obtain more plywood. The bulk of businesses don't want their glass replaced just yet; they just need it secured so they can continue to operate, with plans to replace the glass at a later date.
Jeff Stewart of Stewart's Pawn Shop said his Jefferson location had its drive-thru window broken, and he had to have blood cleaned up from where a vandal cut himself. His store was largely unaffected during the shutdown, as his business was able to stay open, but even he had to close his doors for a day to clean up.
Fourth Street Live is mostly a ghost town as planks of wood and spider webs of rippled glass have replaced the typical bright lights and bustling activity.
One employee at a downtown business said it was all too painful to talk about in what has been the ultimate case of adding insult to injury.
Nearby bar Third Street Dive's voicemail is set up with the following message: "We are currently closed due to COVID-19. We will reopen on June 29 ... fingers crossed nothing changes."
For many business owners, something has changed and in a forceful way. Now, they must step over broken glass while they continue to navigate the unprecedented nature of operating during a pandemic.
$$$
