'united we stand'
Jonathan Bullington,
27 Sep 2020
A massive crowd of marchers — one of the largest in months — returned to the streets of Louisville on Saturday for the 122nd straight day of protests over the police killing of Breonna Taylor, while Mayor Greg Fischer said he would review whether to extend a citywide 9 p.m. curfew that he and the interim police chief credited with helping keep the peace.
"We do think it's contributing to helping make us safer at this point," Fischer said during a brief press conference Saturday afternoon.
But some in the crowd gathered in Jefferson Square Park criticized the mayor and Louisville police for what they saw as heavy-handed tactics against the largely peaceful demonstrators.
"I believe that Mayor Greg Fischer is tone-deaf," said Tiffanie Morris, who came to Louisville from Atlanta for Saturday's protest. "Tell your LMPD to stand down when you have children and mostly women — I see people in wheelchairs — and you are boxing people in. It just seems like you're corralling ... and it is not about supporting people's right to peacefully assemble."
Louisville Metro Police interim Chief Robert Schroeder said LMPD made 22 arrests Friday night for some out after curfew. Tensions continue to run high over a grand jury's decision to not charge three Louisville police officers with Taylor's killing and a growing chorus of voices demand that Attorney General Daniel Cameron to release records of his investigation into that fateful March night.
"I think that (Cameron) is hiding and he's a coward for doing so," said Nicole Rouse, 42, a Louisville resident and high school Spanish teacher who wore her doctorate cap and gown to show that "academics and scholars stand in solidarity with this movement."
"I want the transcripts released," she said. "I want the public to see how that decision was made."
Earlier Saturday afternoon, a dozen protesters stood on the sidewalk outside U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell's Louisville home, some clanging spoons against pots and pans while chanting: "Vote him out" and "Say her name."
Later, a crowd of locals and out-of-state visitors swelled in Jefferson Square Park — headquarters for the ongoing protests. Some replanted a garden around the memorial for Taylor while others shared a meal over conversation.
What appeared to be loud speakers atop the old Jefferson County jail building blasted instructions from police telling protesters to not block streets and to listen to "directions on how to disperse" should police declare an "unlawful assembly."
On Friday, police used flash-bang explosions over the heads of protesters in the NuLu neighborhood after such an "unlawful assembly" was declared. Schroeder said Saturday that was done to get the protesters' attention so they could hear officers' directions to disperse.
On Saturday evening, several hundred protesters marched through downtown streets as police and Kentucky National Guard members kept watch.
"United we stand," protesters yelled with fists in the air, "divided we fall!"
Protest leaders about 8 p.m. began telling people who didn't want to break curfew to leave, as the group planned to occupy Jefferson Square Park.
Courier Journal reporters Hayes Gardner, Bailey Loosemore, Matt Mencarini and Ben Tobin and Indianapolis Star reporters Lawrence Andrea and Binghui Huang contributed to this report.
Protesters gather in front of the Louisville Metro Department of Corrections at Sixth and Liberty streets on Saturday.
Max Gersh/Courier Journal
Denorver Garrett holds a cross outside Mitch McConnell's house in Louisville.
Bailey Loosemore/courier journal
A man wearing a shirt reading "slap your local racist" protests outside McConnell's home.
Bailey Loosemore/Courier Journal
Melissa Beckham Born, right, protests outside McConnell's home in the Highlands neighborhood.
Bailey Loosemore/Courier Journal
Dr. Nicole Rouse wears the cap and gown she wore to her 2018 doctoral graduation to Jefferson Square and walks past the large painting of Breonna Taylor on Saturday afternoon. "As a scholar and academic, I stand in solidarity with this movement. We need to listen."
$$$
