BBC examines Courier Journal's COVID-19 reporting
Green, Richard A
23 June 2020
How have two newsrooms, separated by 8,235 miles and three continents, responded to a global health pandemic and found ways to connect with readers?
That's the question behind a new BBC World Service podcast documentary that debuted Saturday night called, "Reporting Covid-19." It features The Courier Journal, Kentucky's largest news site, and the Mumbai Mirror, one of the world's largest newspapers with 700,000 daily copies in India's largest city.
The hourlong show features April and May interviews with editors and reporters from the respective newsrooms just as the coronavirus health crisis had taken a firm grip over both cities, both countries and in daily coverage by The Courier Journal and Mirror newsrooms.
Nina Robinson, a veteran journalist and award-winning audio and video producer with the BBC World Service Network, spearheaded the project from her loft apartment outside of London. There, she conducted lengthy interviews with Courier Journal Editor Richard Green, Opinion and Engagement Editor Veda Morgan, Narrative Editor Kristina Goetz and investigative reporter Matt Mencarini. She also talked to the Mumbai Mirror's top editor and key members of the staff.
"Usually I'd be traveling to make this program and spend time walking in the shoes of these newspaper editors and reporters," Robinson said. "But this is a different way of reporting for all of us."
This documentary was an exploration of "two newsrooms during this time of great uncertainty as each country comes to terms with coronavirus, handling lockdowns, hospital admissions and the unequal impact the virus is having on the poor and on ethnic minorities."
Robinson took nearly two months to dig into the headlines and prominent stories in Louisville and Mumbai. She explores the tragic loss of life, the growing impatience to "reopen" economies and the pressure politicians, including Gov. Andy Beshear, felt at times while juggling the safety considerations of COVID-19 with mounting pressure to let stores, restaurants and other aspects of everyday life return to normal.
The documentary also discusses incredible sacrifices by those on the front lines of the medical response in the U.S. and India. She also digs into the soaring rates of virus-caused deaths of Black residents of Kentucky as compared to total African American populations.
Robinson also spends time examining how the pandemic's daily headlines have been supplanted because of incidents like the March 13 police shooting death of Breonna Taylor in Louisville. That incident has been a catalyst in an international conversation that has included protests and demonstrations related to race relations and police brutality of African Americans.
"It's safe to say that we'll probably never see a collision of two such significant stories, COVID-19 and the race protests, happen simultaneously again anytime soon," Robinson said in an interview with Green. "My desire is to learn how two newsrooms — with totally different subscriptions totals, that serve different readers and are operating in two significantly different countries — are covering the pandemic and now the race story."
The BBC World Service podcast can be accessed here: bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/p08hk0p9
It is the second time in two years the BBC has featured The Courier Journal newsroom.
In October 2018, a three-person reporting team from Great Britain spent six weeks embedded in the Louisville newsroom, shadowing reporters and digging into the opioid crisis and the newspaper's coverage. BBC reporters and producers went to hospitals, rehab centers and drug court and rode with first-responders.
The three-part "Everyday Americans" series was an immersive look at how a mid-sized American newsroom was covering one of the largest health tragedies to strike the United States by interviewing Courier Journal staffers and telling the stories of those addicted, recovering and affected by the opioid crisis.
That series link can be found here: bbc.co.uk/programmes/w27vq17q
A member of the crowd wipes away tears May 31 during a Black Lives Matter healing rally in front of KFC Yum! Center in downtown Louisville.
$$$
