UK will remove mural on campus depicting slavery
Watkins, Morgan
06 June 2020
University of Kentucky President Eli Capilouto announced Friday that the school will remove a longstanding mural on campus that students have criticized as racist for its depictions of black and Native American people.
UK students have raised concerns repeatedly about the mural's controversial and painful depictions of people of color — including images of a Native American clutching a tomahawk and black people working in a field — and called for its removal.
Capilouto previously said it was difficult for him "to think of destroying that piece of art," which UK graduate Ann Rice O'Hanlon painted in 1934 for the Public Works of Art Project that was part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal.
Capilouto's decision to finally remove the mural comes amid nationwide protests against police brutality and widespread condemnation of the recent police killings of black Americans like Breonna Taylor in Louisville and George Floyd in Minneapolis.
In a campuswide announcement Friday about the mural's removal, Capilouto expressed horror over Floyd's killing, which was caught on video.
"Why now? And what does this move accomplish?" Capilouto said of his decision to get rid of the mural. "Just as certain images haunt me, I also cannot escape certain conversations that, over years, remain fresh.
"I remember a conversation at Maxwell Place with 24 African American students in the fall of 2015. There was a conversation with one student about the mural who stopped me cold with the observation that every time he walked into a class in Memorial Hall, he was forced to reckon with the fact that his forbears were enslaved.
"They were chattel; brutalized as disposable property, even though in their time, they were regarded as essential to the economy's progress," Capilouto said. "The art, to this student, sought to glorify and sanitize that fact.
"And he was speaking for many others, over many years, a point made clear again to me recently as we began conversations with our student leaders on how to move forward during this fraught time," said Capilouto, who has led the university since 2011. "The mural once again was a symbol, not of a state's evolution, but of our unwillingness to recognize their experiences as members of our community."
Stuart Horodner, the director of the UK Art Museum, said in 2018 that the mural shows a "collapsed history" of Kentucky and has been criticized for failing to fully represent the experiences of slaves and Native Americans — especially the horrific treatment they suffered.
The debate over whether to remove the mural spanned years, as did Capilouto's efforts to address students' concerns without actually getting rid of it.
In 2015, Capilouto temporarily shrouded the mural after meeting with concerned students. UK unveiled it in 2017 and added information to the display to provide context about it.
Then, in 2018, UK commissioned fresh artwork by artist Karyn Olivier, whose piece in Memorial Hall includes an inscribed quote from Frederick Douglass, the renowned American abolitionist and writer who was born into slavery, that says: "There is not a man beneath the canopy of heaven, that does not know that slavery is wrong for him."
The mural was publicly criticized again by UK students in the spring of 2019.
Students occupied the school's Main Building overnight to call for Capilouto's administration to remove the mural and address other problems black and low-income students face on campus.
At the time, Capilouto agreed to shroud the mural again and promised to engage in a longer-term conversation about how to address the students' concerns about that and other issues. UK spokesman Jay Blanton said Friday that the mural is still covered.
As for how the mural will be removed, Blanton said: "It is a fresco that is embedded into what is a load-bearing wall in the foyer of Memorial Hall. There needs to be some analysis around how best to remove it. Our facilities area, along with architectural experts, will be analyzing how best to move forward and putting together a plan."
UK officials haven't decided what to do about Olivier's artwork at Memorial Hall, which the university commissioned in an effort to deepen the dialogue about the mural and American history, Blanton said. That will require further discussion and planning.
On Friday, Capilouto noted that the mural carries "tremendous symbolic weight" and admitted the university's prior attempts to address concerns about it haven't worked.
$$$
