What Kentucky, US politicians are saying about the protest
30 May 2020
Kentucky and national elected leaders on Friday spoke out about the overnight protest in Louisville, where seven were shot, and race-related unrest across the nation. Here's what they had to say:
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell released an afternoon statement saying the killings of Breonna Taylor in Louisville, George Floyd in Minneapolis and Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia "have shaken our nation."
"For millions and millions of outraged Americans, these tragedies do not appear as isolated incidents, but as the latest disturbing chapters in our long, unfinished American struggle to ensure that equal justice under law is not conditional on the color of one's skin," McConnell stated.
McConnell expressed support for the investigations into Taylor's death and said her family members "deserve truth, accountability, and justice," but decried the violence that took place in Louisville and Minneapolis.
U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth of Louisville tweeted, "Last night was tough for us all. Heartbroken to see gunfire erupt during otherwise peaceful protests here in Louisville."
Gov. Andy Beshear tweeted out a statement from Tamika Palmer, the mother of Taylor, that urged avoiding violence as they demand accountability for her death.
"Breonna Taylor's family & the public deserve the truth," Beshear tweeted. "We should honor Breonna's legacy as an EMT & the pursuit of the truth should not be marred by violence."
Beshear also addressed the protest in his daily press conference Friday, reading a statement from Taylor's mother, adding that Louisville is "a city where we can see the impacts and the vestiges of slavery, of segregation, of Jim Crow. And it's almost that it occurs on a specific street."
Later in the press conference, he added: "I can't pretend to understand the level of frustration, fatigue, that people must feel with hundreds of years of inequality. ... To see videos of someone putting their knee on someone else's throat while they cry out for help and nobody does anything about it. I can't pretend to know how that feels. I can commit to listen. Being the governor ... I can commit to doing everything I can in our system to help."
President Donald Trump tweeted early Friday morning that those behind looting and violence in Minneapolis were "THUGS" and added, "when the looting starts, the shooting starts."
On Friday afternoon, he tweeted again: "Looting leads to shooting, and that's why a man was shot and killed in Minneapolis on Wednesday night - or look at what just happened in Louisville with 7 people shot. I don't want this to happen, and that's what the expression put out last night means...."
Yarmuth and Beshear both decried Trump's tweet, with Beshear saying on CNN that elected officials have a responsibility "not just to maintain the peace, which is what we ought to be doing, but to also listen, to show empathy, and to try to find a way to move in the right direction, not the wrong one."
Attorney General Daniel Cameron issued a statement on Twitter, saying "Louisville is my home, and my heart is heavy concerning the fear and unrest in our city following the death of Ms. Breonna Taylor."
The Kentucky Fraternal Order of Police said the Taylor protests on Thursday showcased Louisville Metro Police officers' "professionalism and dedication to their city and fellow citizens," praising them while criticizing decisions made by city leadership.
Gov. Andy Beshear tweeted out a statement from Tamika Palmer, the mother of Taylor, that urged avoiding violence.
$$$
