Palmer: 'It's a beautiful thing'
Kobin, Billy
21 June 2020
Breonna Taylor's death has brought thousands of protesters to downtown Louisville over the past few weeks, with Jefferson Square Park a central hub for the demonstrations.
On Saturday, the roar of hundreds of motorcycles on Jefferson Street signified the arrival of the latest group to come to the park in honor of Taylor.
Over 300 riders, part of the Middle Tennessee Motorcycle Governing Committee, joined up with other bikers from Kentucky and the region as part of the "Pounding 4 Change Breonna Taylor Movement Ride." The charity ride left Nashville at 8 a.m. Saturday and made several stops along the way in Kentucky to gather more riders before arriving in Louisville just after noon.
Vincent "Big Dog" Harris, president of the Selected Few, which is affiliated with the middle Tennesee motorcycle group, said the charity ride raised $1,800, which will go to Taylor's family and support "advocacy efforts" in her case.
"We want to be a part of this," Harris said after the riders parked their bikes in the middle of Jefferson Street outside Metro Hall. "We are here to support her family and everybody else."
Local community activist Christopher 2X said his Game Changers organization and the motorcyclists also want Louisville officials to rename either the circle in Jefferson Square Park as "Breonna Taylor Fountain Circle" or a different public place in her memory.
2X said a renamed space in honor of Taylor would "memorialize her" and create "a permanent marker" in her honor. 2X added that his group pushing for the renamed space has contacted Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer and that the mayor has expressed support for the idea.
Other local leaders, including Metro Councilwoman Barbara Sexton-Smith and Tom O'Shea of O'Shea's Irish Pub, are involved in the renaming effort, 2X said.
The circle in Jefferson Square Park has already turned into a memorial over the past weeks and is full of signs, flowers, photos and messages in support of Taylor and the Black Lives Matter movement.
Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician, was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro Police officers fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a search warrant as a part of a narcotics investigation.
Court records show that police obtained a warrant with a no-knock provision for Taylor's apartment signed by Jefferson Circuit Judge Mary Shaw.
Even so, LMPD officials have said that plainclothes officers knocked and announced their presence before breaking in Taylor's door with a battering ram.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who was with her in the apartment, fired one shot in response, hitting Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove returned fire, striking Taylor at least eight times.
She died in her hallway.
Protests have continued in Louisville for over three weeks, coinciding with mass demonstrations around the country against the death of George Floyd and other Black Americans at the hands of police.
Earlier this month, the Louisville Metro Council unanimously voted to pass "Breonna's Law," which bans no-knock search warrants and requires that all officers serving warrants wear body cameras.
The officers who executed the warrant at Taylor's apartment in March were not wearing body cameras, LMPD leaders previously said.
In Louisville, protesters have demanded that the officers involved in Taylor's death face termination and criminal charges. On Friday, one of their demands was realized when Fischer announced that LMPD is moving to fire Hankison.
The other two officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment – Mattingly and Cosgrove – remain on administrative reassignment.
Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, was at Saturday's rally and even got a ride on one of the motorcycles.
"It's a beautiful thing," Palmer said of the motorcycles and effort to rename a public in her daughter's memory. "But it's a start, it's a start."
Regarding Hankison's possible firing and other changes that have been made following her daughter's death, Palmer said the process has been "slow, but it's coming."
"As long as it comes, I'm happy for that," Palmer said.
"It was a long time coming," she added, of Hankison's termination, which the officer can appeal. "It's just the beginning. Like I've said, that doesn't put a dent in what happened. ... I'm just thankful to everybody."
Tytianna Wells, who is working with 2X on the renaming effort, said honoring Taylor is even more important because as a Black woman, Taylor was an emergency medical worker in an often white-dominated field who embodied Louisville's "Compassionate City" efforts.
2X, who often works with the families of shooting victims, said Taylor helped those scarred by gun violence in her work at University of Louisville and Norton hospitals.
"She was somebody who saved lives," Wells said. "She was an everyday hero."
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
A group of motorcyclists from Tennessee drove to Louisville to show their support and encourage the renaming of Jefferson Square after the late Breonna Taylor.
$$$
