Listening could have averted Taylor's death
Quintez, Brown
14 June 2020
Breonna Taylor could still be alive had we listened to this west Louisville couple two years ago.
Mario Daugherty and Ashlea Burr live in Louisville's Russell neighborhood and filed a lawsuit against the Louisville Metro Police Department for violating their Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable search and seizure.
"They held my 14-year-old at gunpoint," Burr said, recalling the details of the terrorizing raid that took place on Oct. 26, 2018. "The first initial thought was, 'Is somebody robbing us?'"
It was a "no-knock" search warrant.
On that rainy October day, a SWAT team smashed Daugherty and Burr's glass front door, used explosive devices and drew assault rifles on the three children inside.
Police claimed they were looking for a man and woman suspected of growing and selling marijuana. Nothing was found.
Officers invaded their home, destroyed their property and permanently harmed an innocent West End family.
When asked about the lawsuit filed last year, a police spokesperson said the department does not comment on pending litigation.
The home, on the 1900 block of West Chestnut, happens to be one I was raised in. Mario Daugherty is my cousin and had rented the house from a family friend after his Indiana home was severely flooded in early 2018.
He had fled one tragedy only to be met with another months later.
"It was upsetting. You're supposed to be safe in your home," Daugherty said.
However, safety is not a privilege afforded to many West End residents, who too often live in a state of surveillance and terror perpetrated by the police department, residents tell me.
The concept of "home" for Black people has been continuously challenged by the threat of violence.
Our ancestors were routinely kidnapped and sold from the plantations they called home. Their offspring faced the terror and fear of their homes being snatched by white mobs and Black Codes — laws designed to limit the freedom of African Americans. And even in their fight for civil rights, the deaths of Medgar Evers at his front door and Fred Hampton in his bed in an era of firebombing showed there is no sanctity of the Black home.
Shot and killed in their homes by the police this past year, Atatiana Jefferson, an African American 28-year-old pre-med student in Fort Worth, Texas, and Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old African American woman from Louisville, show us that our homes and communities are far from being protected and served.
Breonna, like Burr and Daugherty, was in the comfort of her home. One moment she was in bed and the next she was lying in a pool of blood in her own hallway after being shot eight times by intruding police officers, according to attorneys for her family.
"When you walk in your house and you lock your door, you feel that's supposed to be your security... you know whatever happens in this house, we're in control," Burr said. "We didn't have no control over anything that day. We've been feeling like that ever since."
That feeling of helplessness was reinforced after the March 13 death of Taylor gained national attention.
Daugherty and Burr have been embroiled in a legal battle with LMPD regarding no-knock warrants, but that legal pressure wasn't enough to end the practice and prevent Taylor's death.
"We told y'all this was going to happen. That's the sad part about it," Daugherty said.
"It's really kind of personal for us."
In a May 22 letter demanding a federal investigation of LMPD, Sen. Kamala Harris of California and Rep. Lucy McBath of Georgia highlighted that Daugherty and Burr's case had "troubling parallels" with the raid on Taylor's apartment.
But the initial lack of media attention Daugherty and Burr received highlights a common theme among Black Americans. Stories of police violence and terror are largely untold and unreported, but the experience is felt by many who live in predominantly Black neighborhoods like Louisville's West End.
Kris Smith, 41, was born and raised in the Parkland neighborhood. He garnered media attention recently when he captured on Facebook Live the moment David McAtee was killed by law enforcement.
McAtee, 53, was shot to death on June 1 when LMPD officers and Kentucky National Guard troops were sent to clear the parking lot of Dino's Food Mart at West Broadway and 26th Street — across from the BBQ shack McAtee owned. Law enforcement showed up after reports of a crowd gathered after curfew. State investigators say McAtee fired first at law enforcement, and they responded.
But some in the community say law enforcement officers were the aggressors, and they question why the police and National Guard were even called out to a peaceful gathering.
"They got too much power," Smith said of the police. "They're supposed to be here to enforce laws but that's not what they're doing. ... They are aggressive. They're disrespectful."
Smith has been on the front lines of protests these past two weeks livestreaming the action on his Facebook account. He said he witnessed the violence by police escalate from shooting rubber bullets at reporters to shooting real bullets, one of which killed McAtee.
Too often, Smith says police have little regard for Black people in the West End — and he says he's seen officers turn violent with West End residents. That escalation of violence from police is something Smith says is normal for Black people in our community.
"You get pulled over for anything. ...[They] search you when they should just give you a ticket. ... Four or five of them pull up when normally it should take only one or two. ... [They] slam you to the ground and talk real crazy to you."
Smith says the root of this excessive violence is Black people questioning the authority of the police.
"In America, the worst crime is being disrespectful to the police."
When Black Americans decide to express our rights as citizens, we're often met with violence. Black protesters, expressing their right to assembly and free speech, were met with tear gas canisters, rubber bullets and detainment.
To naturally defend your body, your home, or your freedom is to be criminal and a threat to America's racial order. That's why Kenneth Walker, Taylor's boyfriend who said he fired at police in self-defense, was incarcerated at home since mid-March while the three officers who shot Breonna Taylor are on administrative reassignment despite calls that they be fired.
When young Black protesters make bold demands like "Black Lives Matter" and "Defund the Police," threatening to dismantle existing power structures, their quest for liberation is labeled as reckless, chaotic and criminal.
This historic repression of Black people in the West End has led residents like Burr to doubt the legitimacy of law enforcement.
"We don't have nobody to call, we scared to call the police. I'm not going to call the police to come help me for anything because of what they did when they came."
Smith blames LMPD's history of violence on the lack of leadership by city officials. He said Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's recent comments about the community not wanting to defund the police do not reflect how his community feels.
"He don't listen to us. He just don't," Smith said.
Quintez Brown is a writer at The Courier Journal. He can be reached at 502-650-3190 or qbrown@courierjournal.com.
Tell me your story
This summer, my mission is to help tell the stories of people who live in my neighborhood — Louisville's West End. I will be on the streets of our communities — in California, Shawnee, Russell, Parkland, Park Hill, Park DuValle, Algonquin and Portland — talking with residents, amplifying their stories and sparking conversations about what our community needs to prosper. Those stories are waiting to be told; I can't do that without you. So tell me your story.
Follow me at @quintez.brown on Instagram, @quintez_brown on Twitter, and @quintezbrown925 on Facebook. Or reach me at qbrown@courierjournal.com.
Tamika Palmer wore a T-shirt bearing her daughter Breonna Taylor's face at a Saturday vigil at Jefferson Square.
$$$
