Preparation is galloping for a Derby like no other
Adams, Kirby
26 Aug 2020
And down the stretch we come. The 146th Kentucky Derby is only 10 days away. And in pure 2020 fashion, the race won't look, feel or sound like it ever has before.
Ten days from now, when the field of contenders breaks from the starting gate, there won't be any fans in the stands to cheer during the high-stakes competition between majestic thoroughbreds racing for glory on the dirt racetrack at Churchill Downs.
This year, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the horse race is once again the focal point of the annual Run for the Roses. In a way, it's a return to the race's origins.
More than a century before celebrities like actress Bo Derek and musician Joey Fatone made the Kentucky Derby an annual pilgrimage, before there were enough millionaires to require a fancy section at Churchill Downs referred to as "Millionaires Row," and even before the Kentucky Derby Festival Pegasus Parade carried Derby Princesses in their sparkling tiaras down Broadway, the Kentucky Derby was simply a horse race.
That simplicity is the Kentucky Derby we'll get this year inside the track. Outside the track is another story.
Take the Louisville Metro Police Department. In a normal year, 10 days before the Kentucky Derby, traffic and security plans would already be in place. But with Churchill Downs announcing 15 days before race day the spread of the coronavirus would make it too dangerous to allow fans into the venue, the police department is reassessing the needs.
"At this point with all the changing, we are assessing the changes and making plans to address whatever will be needed," said Jessie Halladay, a spokeswoman for LMPD.
With no fans allowed to travel to Churchill Downs, those needs no longer include elaborate traffic measures. Instead, LMPD will focus on increased security measures in light of the Black Lives Matter protests being staged outside the track on Derby Day.
Several local protesters previously told The Courier Journal they want Churchill Downs to cancel the race altogether as a statement against the Louisville police officers who fatally shot Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed during a narcotics investigation at her apartment in March.
Churchill Downs says that it will be sensitive and respectful of people's feelings and that the racetrack plans to treat the 146th running of the Kentucky Derby for what the day represents at its core — a historic horse race.
"This year's Derby was never going to be the kind of celebration we're used to, and now more than ever, we know that this will be a very different kind of Kentucky Derby," said Churchill Downs President Kevin Flanery. "We hope our fans, the Louisville community and our country find an opportunity over the coming weeks to reflect on the challenges we have faced this year as a community and as a nation, and work together toward a better and safer future."
Here's what else is going on behind the scenes 10 days out from the 146th Kentucky Derby:
The fastest two minutes in sports Four months is a lifetime for a 3-year-old thoroughbred.
So when the Kentucky Derby is held on the first Saturday in May, there are always question marks about horses' maturity, stamina and ability.
But in this rarest of years when the Kentucky Derby has been rescheduled for the first Saturday in September — and after a summer filled with big races — those questions have mostly been answered.
There's little doubt about the Kentucky Derby this year: Tiz the Law is the horse to beat.
The Belmont winner made it clear Aug. 8 at Saratoga when he won the Grade 1 Travers, a 1 1/4-mile race that is the same distance as the Kentucky Derby.
"I know now he can go the distance, but he has to run the race," jockey Manny Franco said. "I'm looking forward to the next race. Hopefully the horse keeps sound. I'm in good hands. (Trainer Barclay Tagg) knows what he's doing, and he knows what we've got."
Tagg trained 2003 Kentucky Derby winner Funny Cide, who became the first New York-bred horse in history to win the Run for the Roses. Tiz the Law will try to become the second.
"He's unbelievable, and I've never been on a horse in my career like this one," Franco said. "I'm enjoying the moment."
Because of his six wins in seven career starts, Tiz the Law figures to be one of the heaviest Derby favorites in recent memory.
Mike Battaglia, who has set the morning line for the Kentucky Derby each year since 1975, said Tiz the Law could be the heaviest post-time favorite in the Run for the Roses since Point Given was the 9-5 choice in 2001.
For a heavier favorite than Point Given, you have to go back to 1992, when Arazi was the 9-10 post-time choice.
Tiz the Law's top competition appears to be Haskell winner Authentic, Ellis Park Derby winner Art Collector and Shared Belief runner-up Honor A.P.
Kentucky Derby from home Ten days before the historic horse race, Jeff Koleba, vice president of marketing and programming at Churchill Downs, and his digital team are putting the final touches on hour-by-hour interactive content for a worldwide audience of race fans at kentuckyderbyathome.com.
"We've created a collection of interesting ways for fans to go behind the scenes to see and learn about the horses, the race and the history of the Kentucky Derby while enjoying the day safely from home," Koleba said.
Starting Sept. 1 and continuing through the Kentucky Derby on Sept. 5, every race of Derby Week will be streamed live. Also throughout Derby Week, the Churchill Downs team will offer live feeds from the backside of the track during the contenders' morning workouts.
You can watch the early morning workouts in your pajamas from home and ask the experts questions about what you are seeing at the track.
Koleba and his team will also take you to the homes of Kentucky Derby winners and future contenders through an informative series of "Watch Parties." These are prerecorded tours of Kentucky horse farms where champion thoroughbreds have been retired and where foals are being raised to compete in the future.
"We've worked to create an online environment where viewers are able to interact with one another as they watch the tours," Koleba said. "We also carry the Post Position Draw live, take viewers to the location that supplies the hay which the Derby champions are fed and we'll go inside the announcer's booth where viewers can see Churchill Downs' track announcer Travis Stone in action and ask him questions when he's not calling a race."
The experience goes even further to include extensive cocktail and menu recipes from Churchill Downs Executive Chef David Danielson and special at-home recipes created by Antoni Porowski, host of Netflix's hit series "Queer Eye."
For those creating an at-home Derby party, you'll find recipes from his New York Times bestselling cookbook "Antoni In The Kitchen," a cocktail recipe honoring Black Jockey Jimmy Winfield and mocktail named for female jockey Rosie Napravnik.
The website also features sections with everything you need to know for Derby betting and a tab filled with ideas for creating a Derby experience at home — including how to order your official racing program, ideas for decorating and activities, and information on giveaways.
And let's not forget the traditional garlands presented to the winner of the Oaks and Derby. This year the intricate floral blankets will be constructed on the grounds at Churchill Downs and viewers are invited to view the stream beginning Thursday.
A pop of color at Churchill Downs With or without fans, Churchill Downs will look its best when viewers across the globe tune in to watch the legendary horse race on NBC Sports.
No one knows that better than Churchill Downs Horticulture Director Matt Bizzell and his team of nine who have been working throughout the summer to keep the grounds in tip-top shape for the big race.
"My crew has done an incredible job of working through uncertain times and ever-changing conditions," Bizzell said. "I should add that doing physical labor in the heat with a mask on is not easy. Their dedication to this place and our grounds is amazing."
Planting, pruning and prepping more than 20,000 annuals started the first of May and has continued throughout the summer.
The extra months of growing time have resulted in an amplification of size and color in the flowers, bushes and plants covering the grounds.
"Everything we planted in the spring is still in the ground and will look a little different on Sept. 5 because it has had all summer to grow, said Bizzell, "As a result, our plants are a lot bigger, a little wilder and there is a lot more color."
A fancy hat with nowhere to go When you make your living creating elaborate hats for the Kentucky Derby, this year has been hard on business.
"We sold close to 600 hats in 2019. This year we've sold 90," said Rachel Bell, co-owner of The Hat Girls, 136 St. Matthews Ave.
Ten days before the most important fashion day in Louisville, the milliner and her business partner, Kate Welsh, should be working around the clock to fill last-minute custom orders and moving the majority of their inventory to pop-up shops in hotels in downtown Louisville.
"The final few days before Derby we sell most of our hats to people flying in from out of town," said Bell. "Well, that's not happening, so instead I will have a 25%-off sale and hope people want something to wear at home or save until next year."
For sure, 2020 has been a tough year for milliners. Many shops, including The Hat Girls, quickly adjusted their inventory to include matching face masks when it looked like Churchill Downs would hold the races with a limited number of fans, but now, 10 days out from the races and with no fans attending in person, Bell is looking to the future.
"Well you know, it's just 6 1/2 months until the 147th Kentucky Derby," she said.
$$$
