Louisville protesters want Derby canceled
Loosemore, Bailey; Gardner, Hayes
23 Aug 2020
Fans or no fans, Churchill Downs should not run the 2020 Kentucky Derby, say protesters who have spent 86 days calling for racial justice in Louisville.
On Friday, Churchill Downs announced that it will no longer allow fans at the 146th Kentucky Derby amid the global coronavirus pandemic, a move made to "protect the health, safety and security of our community in these challenging times."
But several local protesters told The Courier Journal they still want the company to cancel the race altogether as a statement against the Louisville police officers who fatally shot Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed during a narcotics investigation at her apartment in March.
"They need to say we're not going to have the Kentucky Derby until Mayor (Greg) Fischer arrests" the officers who shot Taylor, including Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, Detective Myles Cosgrove and former Detective Brett Hankison, said Aaron Jordan, a member of the local group No Justice No Peace Louisville.
"If Breonna Taylor can't get justice, then horses can't run. Have horses now become more important than Black life?"
In response to the ongoing protests, Churchill Downs President Kevin Flanery said he knows "the city is going through a lot right now," and the company intends to start a dialogue with residents "about equality for everyone, justice for everyone. That's an important thing."
Flanery did not cite the protests as a reason for disallowing fans at the event, and he said the Louisville Metro Police Department did not advise the company on its decision.
"The whole situation is always about safety," he said. "We didn't get any recommendation from anybody, from the state or anybody, to shut down."
But protesters and city officials have said they anticipate widespread demonstrations on Derby Day, and the Not F****** Around Coalition, a national Black militia, has announced plans to return to Louisville to protest the event. More than 300 members of the group visited Louisville in July.
On Derby Day, demonstrations will "be all across the city, but it's gonna mainly be at Churchill Downs," said Neal Robertson, a protester and organizer.
Adrian Baker, the student body president of Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary and an activist who was arrested following protests at Attorney General Daniel Cameron's house last month, said that running the race without fans is "not enough."
"For those that want to have a Derby in the midst of all this turmoil that we have, and there's no justice for Breonna, I don't think it is right and forthright to celebrate in this manner," he said.
Carmen Jones, a protester and a regular at Jefferson Square Park demonstrations, has similarly asked what the city has to celebrate.
"Louisville doesn't deserve any celebrations," she said. "They don't deserve a Derby, they don't deserve a Thunder Over Louisville, they don't deserve anything, they don't even deserve Halloween and the little pumpkin thing that goes on in Iroquois Park. Louisville deserves nothing. Nothing."
Jordan, of No Justice No Peace, added that Churchill Downs has done little to invest in and support Louisville's Black neighborhoods.
And if the company truly wants to have a conversation, it needs to decide how it can "make sure Black spaces are protected and preserved and established and allowed to thrive," he said.
Courier Journal reporter Ben Tobin contributed to this report.
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore atbloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/baileyl.
$$$
