Do we have the will for change?
19 July 2020
Like so many other cities across America, Louisville has had its share of tragedies involving law enforcement, including the Breonna Taylor and David McAtee cases. Their deaths, along with those of George Floyd in Minneapolis and so many others nationwide, have prompted protests, investigations and soul-searching.
I applaud the actions by Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer to address police department improvement opportunities, hold individuals accountable and swiftly make changes, though I know that offers little comfort to people who have been victims of police abuse for decades, if not longer. The truth is that the roots of discrimination and injustice run deep in America and digging them up will require enormous effort from stakeholders across the spectrum: whites, Blacks, elected officials, community leaders, and, of course, police themselves.
It is long past time to confront the issues that have left our society so broken and divided. We accept a country with more than two million people behind bars, disproportionately people of color, and not nearly enough support for them to reenter society.
We accept a policing profession that often does not reflect the demographics of the population it serves. We accept unequal justice where people of color are over-policed and face tougher sentencing for the very same crimes committed by white people.
We accept the death or injury of 100,000 Americans due to gun violence each year and school children doing live shooter drills. We accept tens of millions of Americans living paycheck to paycheck and unable to cope with a $400 emergency. We accept rising substance abuse and declining life expectancy.
We have the ability to change all of these things. The question is do we have the will?
One of the very best parts of the job of serving as a member of President Obama's cabinet was travelling around the country visiting cities like Louisville, where I stopped in twice in 2015. I met with Mayor Fischer, school leaders, students, parents, teachers and others.
I came away from those visits convinced that Louisville was a city on the move. There was a really palpable sense of civic responsibility and a deep well of community spirit.
Today, Mayor Fischer is poised to take a national leadership role for cities, becoming president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors. America needs his steady, assured voice in these debates, not just to fix policing but to fix so many of the other inequities in society today.
Like many other mayors across America, he wants to build an economy that reflects our shared values, like equity and justice. He has worked to attract a billion dollars of investment to west Louisville. His job-training initiatives are targeting the people who need help the most. His chief equity officer is helping to oversee the economic revival of the city.
He is also demonstrating political courage by having open, honest conversations about all of these issues and in some ways, this is the hardest thing of all. No one wants to face the truth — that America has a troubled policing culture where too often, good officers are neither encouraged nor empowered to call out the bad behavior of their colleagues.
Louisville and other cities cannot wait for Washington to solve this and other systemic problems — especially with this immoral and unethical administration in the White House. Whatever action the federal government may take, it's up to local leaders to embed core American values of justice, equity and fairness into the everyday practices of the men and women under their supervision. Fischer is committed to those values and is doubling down on that commitment, and others should follow suit.
My hope for Louisville, like my hope for my hometown of Chicago and every other city in America, is that we can finally move into the future free of racism and hatred and determined to build the America we were promised. That promise, made to everyone in the Declaration of Independence, was life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
We've fallen short in delivering on that promise, and have to work harder, smarter and faster now to deliver on it.
Anyone who says we can't meet that promise needs to heed the words of one of Louisville's favorite sons. As Muhammad Ali put it, "Impossible is just a big word thrown around by small men who find it easier to live in the world they've been given than to explore the power they have to change it. Impossible is not a fact. It's an opinion. Impossible is not a declaration. It's a dare. Impossible is potential. Impossible is temporary. Impossible is nothing."
Arne Duncan is the former U.S. education secretary.
Your Turn
Arne Duncan
Guest columnist
Mayor Greg Fischer speaks to a crowd at Jefferson Square on June 2.
$$$
