This is why we protest
17 Sep 2020
If Donna Claggett, who wrote the letter of compassion for the drifter who came to her store, read the rest of the newspaper her letter was published in, she would know why people all over the country are protesting. Donna, they are protesting the murder of a woman who was sleeping, Breonna Taylor's murder, and the murder of unarmed drifters who act suspicious to police. Breonna had the kind of job, that if she lived in Goshen, she may have been the person called to help the man Donna was so concerned for, but, she can't now. She was murdered. That is why we protest.
Roxy Lentz
Clarksville, Ind. 47129
Robots and unemployment claims My wife has had an outstanding unemployment claim since March. Half of her COVID-related unemployment was paid, half was not. She has never spoken with anyone who can help her. Robots have called back and said that people would call back.
Robots are not good for their word as robots are only as responsive as the programming they receive. Robots do not care. Nor do programmers who work on robots.
Workers hide behind robot answering services. Six months without a call back from someone who can help, and robots do everything. This is not even a government-run bureaucracy that does not meet the needs of the citizens it is supposed to serve. This is someone who loves to hide behind robots. Six months without a call back from someone who can help. Solution? Fire everyone in the unemployment insurance fulfillment department for the state of Kentucky and have them navigate their robot answering system for six months. The ones that are still interested and have survived their plight could be hired back. This may change fundamentally how the system works. Unless the robots have taken over completely by that point. Then everything would be just the same.
Donald Rapp
Louisville, 40205
Mitch's negative campaign ads Two months before the election and we are inundated with negative campaign ads. As for me, Moscow Mitch can post all of the negative ads he wants and it will not change my mind in who I vote for. He grins and says he can send forth to the floor any bill he wants. But where was that grin when we had all of the unrest from the shooting of Ms. Taylor? He was in Washington, holding up all of the bills on his desk. If you want the same that you have had for 23 years, vote him in again. You get what you vote for. But by all means, vote.
Ann Horstman
Louisville, 40208
$$$
