LouCity's Spencer talks fatherhood, postseason
Saxon, Jonathan
26 Sep 2020
Forward Luke Spencer has been with Louisville City FC through three different title runs and said each one was different in their own right. Louisville still has two more regular-season games, but the addition of a new teammate in Spencer's life is already something that would make this postseason stand out, should the team find itself on another deep run.
"(We) just had a baby boy," said Spencer. He and his wife, Kristen, welcomed their first child, Emory, on Sept. 12. "He's healthy, mom's healthy (and) were just adjusting to the new normal."
Adding Emory to the fold would have been challenging under normal circumstances, so one can imagine what the stress of a playoff run combined with COVID-19 and continuing protests for Breonna Taylor adds to the situation, but Spencer and his wife are taking everything in stride. The Spencers don't get as much sleep as they used to, but they are committed to making the shifts needed to support Emory the best way they can.
"I don't think you can ever be ready for it," he said. "Your schedule and priorities all change. It's going to be new and you're going to have to make adjustments."
Making adjustments is something that Spencer has certainly become accustomed to throughout his stay with Louisville. Coming over from Cincinnati FC in 2017, Spencer made an immediate impact and led Louisville in scoring as the club went on to win its first USL Championship title.
Spencer adjusted to a new role in 2018 when knee surgery forced him to play coach for part of the season before John Hackworth was hired as the permanent coach. Spencer then became a substitute for the remainder of the season before he went on to score the lone goal in the USL Cup Final that won Louisville its second title.
2019 saw Spencer move back into the starter's role, where he was the team's second-leading scorer, as they made their third straight USL Cup appearance. Spencer finds himself back in a reserve role this season, but he's continuing to make the most of it.
"My seasons have looked different every year that I've been here," Spencer said. "This season, it's been mainly coming off the bench later in games, but I try to embrace every role that I'm given. I try to lead a lot throughout the week, and, if my name is called, I try to contribute everything that I can."
Spencer's roles may shift, but the desire for another championship has not changed. He said confidence is high as Louisville continues to enjoy its nine-game unbeaten streak, but everyone is working to stay humble and maintain their high level of play. Spencer said there's a vibe across the team that feels similar to where they were at this point during the 2018 and 2019 seasons. Spencer and Louisville will continue to make the adjustments necessary to end the season on a strong note, but the newest and biggest adjustment in his life adds a little extra motivation to this year's postseason proceedings.
"Something I did not anticipate was the new found inspiration in having a child," he said. "It's brought more meaning to my life."
Up next
Louisville City FC at Saint Louis FC
8 p.m., Fenton, Missouri
TV: WBKI
Radio: 840-WHAS
$$$
