Fischer asks former chief White to return
Gerth, Joseph
12 June 2020
Struggling to get the city's ills under control, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer has turned to a familiar face to help convince Louisville's African American community to give him a chance to fix the problems that have led to two weeks of nightly protests.
But former Chief Robert C. White, who said Tuesday he has spoken with Fischer about the situation in Louisville – the unrest following the police shooting of Breonna Taylor and the firing of former Chief Steve Conrad – won't be coming back to head the department he ran for eight years.
Jean Porter, a spokeswoman for Fischer, said Fischer has spoken with White at least twice in recent weeks about his search for a new police chief and briefly discussed White becoming interim chief but that White wasn't interested.
White said he is willing to help – but not that way.
"What I told him is that I'd gladly be of any assistance you deem appropriate in helping with the Louisville Police Department, short of being chief," White said.
That leaves Fischer still trying to find someone to run the department in the short term and for the final two years of his term. He said on Wednesday he is using a Washington, D.C.-based search firm to help find a new chief and is asking for community input as to what he looks for in someone to take over.
Former Assistant Chief Robert Schroeder is currently running the force.
But, it's going to be difficult to find someone well-qualified to take over the department in turbulent times, especially when Fischer has just two years remaining in office and is prohibited by law from seeking a fourth term. There's also increasing pressure on him to resign and some talk on the Metro Council about impeachment.
It wouldn't be odd for White to be atop anyone's list to run the department that is in disarray following the shooting death of Taylor, the department's botched response to the protests that followed and the shooting death of David "Yaya" McAtee.
When former Mayor Jerry Abramson brought White to Louisville in 2003, it was to fix a broken department that had angered many in the African American community with a series of high-profile cases in which police killed black suspects.
In quite possibly the most brazen act that angered the community, former Chief Gene Sherrard approved awards for two officers who had inflamed the black community when they shot and killed Desmond Rudolph, a teenager who was unarmed and trying to flee in a stolen car.
The two officers fired 22 rounds into the car, killing Rudolph, because they said they believed he was trying to run over them. When Sherrard approved the awards, it prompted the largest anti-police protests in Louisville in years, and then-Mayor Dave Armstrong fired him.
With just two years left in his term, (sound familiar?) Armstrong appointed veteran officer Greg Smith as acting chief to serve for just 30 days, an appointment that was extended by three months.
Twenty people applied to be chief and only two of them were from outside the department. Eventually, a search committee recommended Armstrong choose from among three longtime members of the police force, and he eventually named Smith as his permanent chief.
Fischer's likely to face a similar situation. No top-notch candidate from outside the department is going to want this job now since they will likely hold it for just two years – until Fischer's replacement is elected – and he or she will probably spend the entire time fighting with the police union.
One former city official who asked not to be named told me Fischer probably sees White as a "silver bullet" to soothe public anger over the shootings of Taylor and McAtee because he is African American and has already gained the trust of the black community.
White said that was a difficult and time-consuming part of the job, even for him. "I was going to 45 or 50 different churches, talking to people," he said.
And while people were fed up with the department and its actions then, it pales in comparison to the anger we're seeing now – not just from the black community but from a wide cross section of the city.
But White, who just turned 68, said he doesn't want to be the chief anywhere.
He's not about to come back to Louisville to take over a troubled department.
"I'm not interested in being a police chief," said White, who is doing consulting work. "I've been doing this for 46 years."
So, Fischer is back to square one.
He expects the search process to take four to six months.
A couple of people I spoke to suggest Fischer convince retired Deputy Chief Yvette Gentry to return to city government to run the police force, saying that she's well respected in the black community and would have an immediate calming influence.
That's undoubtedly what the city needs right now.
$$$
