Master P calls for unity in new Breonna Taylor song
Aulbach, Lucas
23 July 2020
Master P has seen a lot in his rise from childhood poverty to superstardom. Still, the hip hop mogul and No Limit Records founder, with deep ties to Louisville, has been struck by the killing of Breonna Taylor.
Percy Miller — or Master P, as he's been known in the entertainment industry since the 1990s – has released a new track to call attention to the death of Taylor, who was shot and killed by Louisville police at her apartment in March.
Titled "Say Her Name," the song will appear on his upcoming album to be released next week, he told The Courier Journal on Monday.
"This woman had a lot of life to live," Miller said. "My thing is, the way she died, her family needs justice. We can't bring her back, but I feel like through music, we could let people know the pain and the struggle that we're going through."
Miller is a New Orleans native, but his connection to Louisville runs deep. He relocated to the city in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina and found his place in the community.
He inspired and worked with Christopher 2X to found Game Changers, an organization that works to end gun violence and support survivors in the city, and has been a frequent sight around town over the years. In 2018 he met with a local preschool class to stress the importance of education and in 2019 paid for the funeral of Ki'Anthony Tyus, a 13-year-old boy killed in a police car chase.
Taylor's death affected him, Miller said, just like the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis, as Miller has two sons who go to school in the Twin Cities. When 2X, Game Changers' executive director, approached him about making a track to honor Taylor, there was no hesitation.
Miller made the track a late addition to his upcoming album, "No Limit Chronicles: The Lost Tape," which will be released on July 29 in conjunction with a docuseries on his life story. The five-part documentary, titled "No Limit Chronicles," will air on BET beginning July 29, covering his rough upbringing in New Orleans to his success in music and later philanthropic efforts and other ventures.
In 1997, Master P's goal was to "Make 'em Say Uhh." The message in 2020 is to make 'em "Say Her Name."
The new song calls for "equality and unity," with a chorus calling for an end to violent measures taken by police against protesters and others. "Every person from the ghetto ain't a drug dealer," he says, just like "every cop with a badge ain't a killer."
Miller stressed that point when he spoke on Monday. Seeing people of all races in the crowd at protests in Louisville and around the nation, he said, is a powerful sight.
"We're all in this together," he said. "Unity is the only way we're going to get real change."
Taylor's mother and aunt were among the first to hear the track, 2X said.
"I told them about it this morning," he said Monday. "They were so appreciative of him ... to put this together, and to do it where it would be on a national scale."
Miller said her family's encouraging response was one of many reasons he recorded the track. Taylor was a valuable member of a community that he's called home, he said, and Louisville is clearly hurting in the aftermath of her death.
"That's why I thought it was my duty to make this song for Breonna Taylor and her family, because she was doing the right thing," he said. "She wasn't harming anybody."
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Titled "Say Her Name," the song will appear on Master P's upcoming album to be released next week.
Master P
$$$
