2 reporters arrested covering Taylor protests
Ramsey, Mary
25 Sep 2020
The editor-in-chief of a conservative news website says two of his reporters were arrested in downtown Louisville late Wednesday night while covering protests in the wake of a grand jury decision in the Breonna Taylor case.
Geoffrey Ingersoll tweeted that Daily Caller reporters Shelby Talcott and Jorge Ventura were detained by Louisville Metro Police and "will be charged with two misdemeanors related to breaking curfew & unlawful assembly for their alleged failure to comply with police orders to disperse and for press to relegate themselves to an 'observation area.'"
LMPD spokeswoman Jessie Halladay confirmed to The Courier Journal on Wednesday night that Talcott and Ventura were arrested.
Ingersoll said he notified the department that the pair was "reporting for an accredited media outlet and were operating in the capacity of press."
Ingersoll directed questions about the incident to Daily Caller publisher Neil Patel, who said the reporters have been charged, though he "has not seen the paperwork" on what the exact charges are. Talcott was not released from custody until about 5 p.m. Thursday, the Daily Caller tweeted.
Both have been given a court date, according to Patel.
Talcott and Ventura are both listed on a spreadsheet of arrests provided to the media by LMPD.
"I have no idea how or why this confusion happened, especially why the Louisville police department kept detaining them after they knew they were reporters and have now given them a court date after they knew they were reporters," Patel said.
In an additional statement posted to Twitter, Patel wrote in part that LMPD "is going to find out all about this in the form of a lawsuit unless things start changing fast."
Gov. Andy Beshear addressed the arrests at his Thursday afternoon briefing.
"I've not been briefed on the situation at all, about any of the activities that may have led to it and will need to be," he said. "Certainly I believe that the exception that applies to journalists for the curfew, that we need to make sure that not only are journalists are not only able to cover things but also that you're safe when you're out there."
In tweets posted just after 11 p.m. Wednesday, Talcott wrote that "Police are corralling everyone in" along with video. Minutes later, she posted "They have us all on the ground right now." The final tweet she posted Wednesday reads: "We are all on the ground right now and police are taking people and putting them in zip tie cuffs."
Ventura also spoke out on Twitter as the events were transpiring Wednesday, writing, "Just got arrested by #Louisville PD. I will update everyone when I'm released."
$$$
