Fischer questioned
Costello, Darcy; LOUISVILLE COURIER JOURNAL
18 Aug 2020
"It is clear to me that waiting for that process to play out, the mayor will drag it out until he is no longer in office."
Anthony Piagentini
Councilman, R-19th District
Louisville Metro Council Republicans are calling for an unprecedented no-confidence vote in Mayor Greg Fischer and suggesting he resign — a move Fischer has dismissed as a political game.
The resolution, filed Monday with all seven Republicans as co-sponsors, says a new mayor is essential to bring needed change in the Louisville Metro Police Department and that a lack of trust has been fostered by "false claims" of transparency and accountability from Fischer.
It goes on to urge Fischer to resign and to work with the Metro Council to "establish a transition to ensure that the community can begin the process of healing."
The legislation will be assigned to a committee, where it could be voted on next week and sent to the full Metro Council for its consideration as soon as Sept. 3. It has no Democratic co-sponsors.
Fischer said in a statement that it's "sad and shameful" the Republican council members brought "the kind of partisan and divisive political games that have paralyzed Washington, D.C.," to Louisville.
"These are difficult times for all cities in America, ours included, and these challenges are bigger than any one person," said Fischer, who serves as president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
"Now is the time for all elected officials to work together, more than ever, toward common solutions to the ongoing crises of the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic downturn and the calls for racial justice," Fischer added. "That's what I'm doing. Louisville residents deserve no less."
The Metro Council has already initiated a Government Oversight and Accountability Committee investigation into Fischer's handling of the Breonna Taylor case, David McAtee's death and his team's response to ongoing protests for racial justice.
Now, the council could consider sending a clear message that it has lost faith in his leadership of the city — a vote that would be a first for Louisville's merged government.
The legislation gives a few reasons for the no-confidence vote:
Systemic changes are needed at LMPD, in large part due to the "actions and inactions of Mayor Greg Fischer."
Homicides in the city are rising.
Fischer has "chosen to prevent" his staff from participating in council hearings connected to the committee investigation into his response to Taylor's death and ongoing protests.
Fischer "failed to promptly address" allegations of misconduct in Louisville Metro Animal Services, TARC and the LMPD Explorer program.
It took Fischer "77 days to acknowledge his administration refused to enforce local and state laws."
Republicans said in a Monday press conference they had been "holding off" making this move because they wanted to see the council committee investigation play out. But, they said, the administration fighting against having officials testify in open session made clear they didn't intend to provide answers.
"It is clear to me that waiting for that process to play out, the mayor will drag it out until he is no longer in office," said Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District. "I firmly believe that this city can wait no longer to begin the process of healing."
In recent months, Fischer has come under fire from both sides of the aisle, and from across the country, as national attention around Taylor's death has mounted.
The Louisville emergency room technician died March 13 after LMPD officers entered her home with a no-knock search warrant. Her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired what he called a "warning" shot as police entered, striking Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh, and officers returned fire.
Taylor, a Black woman, was shot five times and died in her hallway.
Her death is under investigation by Kentucky's attorney general and by the FBI. Attorney General Daniel Cameron and the U.S. Department of Justice are expected to consider state and federal criminal charges for officers involved.
Fischer sent LMPD's internal case file to the outside law enforcement agencies on May 20, calling it "substantially complete." He's since urged Cameron to make an announcement with his decision.
Protesters have called for the officers involved to be fired, charged and prosecuted, while others have questioned the administration's response to ongoing racial justice demonstrations and leadership of the police department.
Nine Metro Council members, including all seven Republicans, sent a letter to Fischer on July 22 calling on him to set expectations for protesters, based on Louisville's ordinances, and back the enforcement of those rules.
(Since then, LMPD announced it would not allow protesters to block intersections or impede traffic — a move that demonstrators have said is an "intimidation factor" meant to silence calls for justice.)
Other council members, meanwhile, have voiced concerns about the administration's transparency around the Taylor case.
Fischer has said he is willing to release all records related to the case that wouldn't hinder the investigations into Taylor's death — and has shared documents related to the work of the Place-Based Investigations unit that sought the warrant at Taylor's home and was working on an investigation around Elliott Avenue.
The committee investigating Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, among other topics, has already subpoenaed Louisville's chief of public safety and interim police chief, demanding they testify before the committee in open session. Those are being challenged in court.
Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th, said Monday that the no-confidence resolution was a "slap in the face" to the committee doing that work, along with the judge hearing the lawsuit. She called it a "colossal waste of time."
"At the Metro Council, we need to take care of the problems in our community, and not play politics," Sexton Smith said.
Councilman Markus Winkler, D-17th District, too, said he understands people's frustrations with what's happening in Louisville and in cities across the country, but that removing Fischer from office won't make everything better.
"Let's conduct the investigation. If we find evidence of wrongdoing, we should act," Winkler said. "If not, I would encourage everyone to ... work to do things to improve our city."
This resolution, he argued, "undermines" the council's own ability to act, considering it could itself initiate a removal process for Fischer.
"If there's justification to remove, then we should do our jobs and do that. But to pass a resolution that short-circuits that process, I think, is disingenuous partisan politics at best," he said.
State law lays out how the Metro Council could remove the mayor: At least 10 Metro Council members would have to bring charges alleging "misconduct, incapacity, or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his or her office."
There would then be a public hearing with council members "sitting as a court." The decision to remove the mayor would have to be approved by two-thirds of the council members.
Any elected officer removed from office under this state law has the option to appeal to Circuit Court and, from there, to the Court of Appeals.
This legislation does not initiate that process.
Councilman Kevin Kramer, R-11th, the chairman of the Republican caucus, said the resolution is not meant to be partisan, and that it would play out in the committee process.
Piagentini, too, said he thought "we're going to see this is not a partisan issue at all."
Still, Councilman Robin Engel, R-22nd, gave a taste of the debate to come, stating that the caucus would ask Democratic colleagues if they plan to vote for the resolution or "defend the actions of this mayor, and how he's handled this."
"I suspect that ... at the end of the day, this will be a nonpartisan vote, hopefully, and not just ours," he said.
If there were a vacancy in the office of mayor — including if Fischer were removed by the Metro Council — the deputy mayor, Ellen Hesen, would become "temporary mayor" but could serve for no longer than 30 days.
The Metro Council would choose, by majority vote, a person to serve as mayor. If it failed to select a temporary mayor within 30 days of the vacancy, the governor would fill it by appointment, per state law.
Asked Monday who Republicans would support as temporary mayor, Kramer said he hadn't even "contemplated what that might look like."
The Metro Council previously issued a no-confidence vote in LMPD's former police chief, Steve Conrad, who as police chief served at the pleasure of the mayor. Conrad was ultimately fired earlier this year after Fischer learned officers in McAtee's death didn't capture the shooting on body camera footage.
Pointing to that previous no-confidence vote, Sexton Smith said that such votes change nothing.
"The no-confidence vote means absolutely nothing," she said. "This is a distraction. And the last thing the community wants or needs is a political sideshow."
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Inside
What do Metro Council members have to say about no-confidence proposal? 4A
USA Today Network Illustration;
AP Images
"It is clear to me that waiting for that process to play out, the mayor will drag it out until he is no longer in office."
Anthony Piagentini
Councilman, R-19th District
"At the Metro Council, we need to take care of the problems in our community, and not play politics."
Barbara Sexton Smith
Councilwoman, D-4th District
Louisville Metro Councilman Kevin Kramer speaks during a press conference calling for Mayor Greg Fischer to resign on Monday. Behind him are other members of the Metro Council who are supporting the call for Fischer's resignation: James Peden, from left, Scott Reed, Rovin Engel and Anthony Piagentini.
photos by Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
$$$
