Beshear: Lack of body cam footage 'unacceptable'
Watkins, Morgan; Tobin, Ben
02 June 2020
Gov. Andy Beshear spoke with frustration about the fatal shooting of a black man in the West End on Monday morning, calling it "unacceptable" that Louisville police officers involved did not have their body cameras turned on during the interaction.
"After everything that's happened, this can't happen," Beshear said Monday afternoon. "It shouldn't have."
The man who was killed was David McAtee, the popular owner of a barbecue business next to the Dino's Food Mart parking lot, McAtee's nephew told The Courier Journal. The shooting occurred around 12:15 a.m. at the site, which is near 26th and Broadway.
Here are five key takeaways from what Beshear said over the course of his two press conferences, which were held on the same day McAtee died.
Beshear wants all body camera footage to be reviewed In his first press conference, Beshear called for Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer and LMPD to publicly release video of Monday's shooting "as soon as possible."
But Fischer said in a Monday afternoon press conference that the officers involved did not have their body cameras activated — which led to Fischer firing Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad, who planned to step down by the end of June.
Fischer showed video footage from nearby pole cameras as well as police radio transmissions during his briefing. Beshear subsequently said he wants the Kentucky State Police to review the body cameras of all officers on the scene.
"It is unacceptable that the officers that responded last night did not have body cameras on and recording," Beshear said late Monday afternoon. "This is the entire reason that we have those cameras, and every other officer's camera should be reviewed and if they captured any part of the scene, it ought to be released."
State police team is investigating Beshear indicated he quickly pushed for the Kentucky State Police to investigate Monday's shooting and said a team from that agency is doing so.
"I've been in the office since 4:15 this morning reaching out to different groups involved and calling for the Kentucky State Police to be involved with either an independent investigation or direct oversight of this investigation," he said Monday morning.
"The group that is on the ground from the Kentucky State Police is the group that investigates shootings in other police units across the state," he continued. "They are the independent group that does this and they are the only independent group that I have to directly call on to investigate."
Beshear promised a "swift investigation" Monday afternoon and said that the KSP team that's handling it will "let people know the truth" and "truly seek justice."
Beshear says Fischer 'needs to look really hard' at Breonna Taylor case On top of expressing anger over the lack of body camera footage in the shooting of McAtee, Beshear also said it is "unacceptable" how long it is taking the Louisville Metro Police Department to investigate the officers who shot and killed Breonna Taylor in her own home.
An attorney for Taylor's family said Monday he was told that the investigation into the LMPD officers' conduct in her March 13 shooting could take two to three more months.
"It's unacceptable that Breonna Taylor's family has been apparently told it would take months to finish the rest of the investigation," Beshear said.
When asked about Fischer's handling of the matter, Beshear said the Louisville mayor "needs to look really hard" at the case.
"I have not seen that file, or that investigation but I think it requires a very close look," Beshear said.
Officers were responding to curfew violation Beshear provided details Monday morning about the information he has received so far about the McAtee case, although he stressed that the facts are still being determined.
Beshear said it appears the authorities were responding to a violation of the curfew public officials instituted in Louisville but that it doesn't appear the people at 26th and Broadway were part of the protests.
"At least what I'm told, I don't think it was even a demonstration. I think it was a gathering," he said. "And again, we want to get to all the facts, but my understanding is that the conversations weren't even tense once people arrived.
"But that's when at least a shot, if not multiple shots, were fired on LMPD and the National Guard," he continued. "At least what we believe happened is that the National Guard, the police and the crowd that was still with them, in part, were all fired upon."
After that happened, he said it's his understanding that shots were fired by LMPD and a couple of members of the National Guard. Those Guard members both were "pulled off of that direct duty while we are determining what happened."
National Guard not recalled Beshear said the plan is to maintain a similar presence of the National Guard in Louisville to "ensure that we keep order."
He also said new guidelines will be instituted for the Guard but declined to say whether those will include restricting or prohibiting them from deploying to the West End.
He acknowledged he's responsible for sending the National Guard to the city to assist the police during the protests.
"And I don't want anybody hurt in all of this, and that's why we've got to look really carefully at what happened last night because someone was hurt," he said. "There was obviously a shooting and we have a death, and we've got to know all the facts about it."
Numbered markers denote the presence of shell casings after a man was shot and killed by law enforcement officers early Monday morning at the intersection of 26th and Broadway in Louisville.
$$$
