Pilots still gathering downtown
Toran, Andre
23 Sep 2020
Erin Jackson and her husband arrived in Louisville from Chicago on Monday.
The well-tempered weather was their welcome committee as the day was bright and mild and the skies sat soft and high above the iconic Brown Hotel in downtown where they would be staying for the next three days.
Jackson is no stranger to the sky: How the clouds hang suspended in ethereal fashion, how the sun rises and fades, and how the weather up there can change in a matter of moments.
She is a pilot for a major airline in the United States and the communications director for the International Society of Women Airline Pilots, known as ISA+21 — an organization focused on being a voice to "Inspire, Support, and Advocate for female airline pilots," its mission statement reads.
But just as she has witnessed the skies transform behind the seat of a jet, as an out-of-towner she has seen downtown Louisville change overnight: increased police presence, Mayor Greg Fischer calling for a state of emergency in preparation for "potential for civil unrest" and barricades inserted to block off streets less than a mile away from her.
The city's overnight transformation is taking place while Jackson and 70-plus other women participate in the 42nd annual Women's International Pilot Convention at the Brown Hotel, roughly a mile away from Jefferson Square Park — the epicenter of more than 100 days of protests over the death of Breonna Taylor.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was shot by police serving a search warrant inside her southern Louisville apartment in March.
"Hopefully it's just taking precautions to prepare for the worst, and hope for the best I guess," Jackson said through a nervous laugh. "Maybe."
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron is expected to announce a decision in the Taylor case in the next few days — that explains the increased police presence downtown and the barricades.
But what it doesn't explain is why a convention is in town at such a time.
Jackson, who has helped organize the conference alongside conference chair Kara Hatzai, said ISA+21's conventions are planned years in advance, alternating between sites in the United States and abroad. Next year, the group expects to travel to Dublin, and the 2019 conference was held in Sydney, as a different airline hosts the conference in one of its hubs each year.
When ISA+21 planned the conference for 2020, it had no clue that the social landscape of the country would be in shambles, or that Louisville would be facing a decision in the Taylor case, or that COVID-19 would be running rampant throughout the nation.
The organization had previously postponed the convention from May to September due to the pandemic. And because UPS Airlines is this year's host and Louisville is its hub, the women — who represent 5.1% of the world's airline pilots — are here.
"This has been quite the challenge," Jackson said. "We really felt it was important for us to continue and press forward because now more than ever, with us being front-line workers (in the pandemic) and essential employees and how hard the travel industry has been hit, we really felt it was important to keep this going to inspire, support and advocate for our members."
Tuesday was the first day of the three-day conference, which will be used to provide female pilots with resources to overcome pandemic-related furloughs with support funds, a silent auction for scholarships for aspiring female pilots and more.
However, the anticipation and uncertainty surrounding the city and what may or may not unfold call for enhanced security measures, Jackson and officials from the Brown Hotel say.
The hotel officials said no one other than patrons or guests will be allowed within the hotel's confines and that all four entrances to the building, including the garage, will be monitored by hotel security.
"I have walked in downtown Louisville during the day and I don't feel threatened or anything like that," Brown Hotel controller Tiffany Preston said, and her advice to hotel guests is the same as any other day: "Just be cautious of your surroundings."
For now, the convention, in the heart of Louisville, amid a pandemic, with a social justice movement all around, will go on.
"It's very disheartening for the state of not only the travel industry but the state of our nation," Jackson said. "It's just really hurting a lot of people, but we felt it was important to continue and to just wrap our arms around our members."
Contact Andre Toran at atoran@gannett.com. Support strong local journalism: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
Pilot and ISA+21 member Erin Jackson sits in the cockpit of a passenger jet.
$$$
