Police hit $3M in OT costs during protests
Costello, Darcy
30 June 2020
The Louisville Metro Police Department has spent more than $3 million on overtime in response to nightly racial justice demonstrations downtown – likely about one-third of what it typically spends on overtime in an entire year.
Police have been a constant presence at the protests since May 28, the first night that hundreds flocked downtown to demand justice for the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, at times provoking controversy for their use of tear gas and nonlethal weapons.
The department's event staffing began that first Thursday in late May, hours after the 911 call of Kenneth Walker, Taylor's boyfriend, was released publicly. Then-Chief Steve Conrad canceled all off-days for officers, effective immediately, and said members would work 12-hour shifts until further notice.
From that first night through June 14, the department has spent $3,055,021 on overtime, according to figures provided by police officials in response to a Courier Journal records request.
That equates to an average of nearly $170,000 per night, and doesn't include the staffing costs for the past two weeks.
It's possible that costs may have dropped since the first weeks of protest. On June 8, interim Chief Robert Schroeder changed the staffing structure to "reduce the footprint of our crowd control detail" and move some personnel to an as-needed response. It was further changed beginning June 14 to "demobilize" the detail.
The police budget for fiscal year 2020-21 shows scheduled and non-scheduled overtime combined totaled $8,007,200 in fiscal year 2018-19.
The revised budget for the following year was $9,013,600. So, the current $3 million cost is probably about a third of what the department would have spent on overtime in one year.
As of March 31, LMPD had spent $5,733,400 on overtime in fiscal year 2019-20, which ends on June 30, according to a budget document prepared by Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's office prior to his budget address in late April.
That figure, however, doesn't include the typically high overtime spending associated with the Kentucky Derby and Kentucky Derby Festival events. Information Conrad provided to Metro Council members in May shows 2019 Derby Festival and Churchill Downs-related overtime costs totaled $2.3 million.
The city's Office of Management and Budget has not fulfilled a Courier Journal records request from early June for payroll or personnel records that reflect the staffing costs or other financial records pertaining to Metro Government's response to the protests, such as cleanup costs or repairs to city buildings.
But in an email, the city's chief financial officer, Daniel Frockt, said the May 2020 General Fund overtime for LMPD – which would have included four nights of protests – was $1,438,860.46, compared with $842,357.37 in May 2019.
Frockt said he would provide the June overtime totals at the end of June, explaining that the Office of Management and Budget doesn't track the overtime totals by a specific event or individual day.
Jean Porter, a spokeswoman for Fischer, added in a statement that the police department overall is expected to have spent fewer General Fund dollars in fiscal year 2019-20 than the year prior. It is also expected to be underbudget.
LMPD's use of overtime has been a subject of controversy in recent years, with three officers pleading guilty to federal wire fraud charges and some council members accusing police of spending too much on overtime with too few oversight mechanisms.
An audit of overtime spending by LMPD from December 2016 to August 2018, called for by Louisville Metro Council, is expected in the coming weeks. The auditor's team has said the city spent about $17.5 million in police overtime during that time period.
Louisville Metro Police officers wear face shields on May 28 as they form a line at Sixth and Jefferson streets while demonstrators protest the killing of Breonna Taylor by the LMPD.
$$$
