You can't wash away 'Justice for Breonna'
Menderski, Maggie
30 May 2020
I woke up Friday morning to images of graffiti, broken windows and a maimed statue of King Louis in downtown Louisville.
But standing in front of Louisville City Hall just hours after the protest erupted, without that hand-less statue as confirmation, I might have wondered if it was all a dream.
Hundreds marched in downtown Louisville on Thursday night protesting the shooting death of Breonna Taylor, who was killed by police while she was sleeping when they used a no-knock warrant to enter her home in mid-March. What started as a peaceful demonstration eventually turned violent as seven people were shot before the crowd disbanded around 1 a.m.
Like a lot of Louisville, I slept through the gunshots, the chanting and the tear gas, and I started my day reading headlines such as "Two Minutes of Terror" and "'No justice, no peace':7 people shot amid protests for Breonna Taylor," reported by my tirelessly committed Courier Journal co-workers, many of whom worked until 3 or 4 a.m.
I wasn't sure what I would see when I parked my car about 10:45 a.m. outside of Louis D. Brandeis Hall of Justice 600 W. Jefferson St. downtown where the crowd had rallied just hours before.
I never expected to see the Louisville I know and love.
I didn't see the graffiti that Courier Journal photographer Alton Strupp had captured crews scrubbing off walls, windows and monuments around 8:30 a.m. Messages such as "we matter" and "Justice for Breonna" had already been wiped clean. As I looped the blocks near city hall and up toward Main Street, the only shattered window I spotted read "Police Department Exit." It had already been removed and loaded onto a truck bed.
I'd hoped to talk with someone doing the scrubbing or the sweeping, but instead, I found people walking their dogs and carrying their takeout back to their offices.
Make no mistake, our city is hurting. This column is not meant to disparage the message that the protesters took to the streets last night. You can't wipe away that deep pain like you can take messages off a wall.
But in the five hours or so since the sun had come up, our city did its best to put Louisville's physical pieces back together.
As I stood near that hand-less statue and among a few trampled flower beds, I marveled at how quickly the teams had worked.
I wanted to know how it had gotten done.
The Louisville Downtown Partnership put me in touch with James Wells. He's the regional director and on-site manager for Block by Block, a Louisville-based company that works with improvement districts throughout the country to address common downtown issues.
Wells rallied a team of eight Friday morning and started driving the routes by about 7 a.m. They dispatched two litter vacuums – golf cart-like machines that suck up trash through a hose wider than a dinner plate. They took about seven graffiti tags off buildings. Sometimes that meant painting over them with matching paint, and other times it involved treating the words with chemicals and power washing them away.
Wells told me he'd never quite seen anything like this in the Louisville area. The closest he could recall was in September 2008, when the remnants of Hurricane Ike ravaged our city.
His team has dealt with trash, debris, broken glass and tags before, but the thing that made Thursday night unique was that it hit our area all in one swing.
Before we got off the phone, he made sure to give the real credit to the Louisville Metro workers who cleaned through the night.
For the record, I did reach out to them, too. No surprise, they had bigger things to take care of Friday afternoon than giving me a play-by-play of how to remove spray paint.
By the time Wells got there, they'd already taken on the brunt of the mess. Technique wise, this didn't really feel any different than cleaning up from other big downtown "events," like the Kentucky Derby Festival's Thunder Over Louisville.
What was different, though, was how they spent the rest of the afternoon.
Most of the windows protesters shattered were knocked in by stray pieces of concrete and curbing. The Block by Block crews combed the downtown streets and removed any "weapon of convenience" they could find.
Because even though I felt very safe downtown, this might not be over yet.
Just because downtown Louisville felt normal to the untrained eyes doesn't mean it is.
The protesters still want to be heard and they still want "Justice for Breonna."
You can't power wash that away.
Features columnist Maggie Menderski writes about what makes Louisville, Southern Indiana and Kentucky unique, wonderful, and occasionally, a little weird. If you've got something in your family, your town or even your closet that fits that description — she wants to hear from you. Say hello at mmenderski@courier-journal.com or 502-582-7137. Follow along on Instagram and Twitter @MaggieMenderski. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/maggiem.
A pedestrian walks past graffiti in the aftermath of Thursday night's protest regarding recent deaths at the hands of police in Louisville and Minneapolis.
Photos by Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Dottie Compton, a Department of Corrections employee, inspects the glass in her car seats after her windshield was busted during Thursday night's protest.
$$$
