'out here every day'
Duvall, Tessa
29 June 2020
"If Louisville does not show up, then we're not worth our salt. And we're not the 'compassionate city' that we say we are. It's time for all of us to have the same cry: Justice for Breonna. Justice for David McAtee. Stand up. It is time to have your voice heard."
Metro Councilwoman Keisha Dorsey
The day after a shooting left a supporter dead and Jefferson Square Park wiped of their campsite, members of Louisville's racial justice movement vowed to go on undeterred.
"I'll be out here every day," protester Chris Fox said Sunday. "If I have to quit working ... to do this, then I'll do it. I'll take a bullet for each person out here who marches for Black lives."
Activists had camped at the park for a month in protest of the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was shot March 13 as three Louisville Metro Police officers executed a no-knock warrant at her apartment. But on Saturday night, a man opened fire on the tents, killing 27-year-old Tyler Gerth, a budding photographer who had become a vocal supporter of the protests.
He died at the scene, despite attempts to save him by activists and Jefferson County Sheriff's deputies.
Chuck Gerth, Tyler's father, attended a Sunday night vigil for his late son and said he appreciated the prayers and support his family has received since Tyler's death.
"He supported the cause, he saw the injustices with Breonna and saw the injustice throughout the world," he said.
Steven Lopez, 23, has been charged with murder and wanton endangerment in Gerth's shooting, police announced late Sunday afternoon. He was taken to University of Louisville Hospital with a gunshot wound to his leg, caused by a bystander returning fire, according to the arrest citation.
Metro Councilwoman Keisha Dorsey called Gerth's shooting "the straw that broke the camel's back."
"You cannot be silent," Dorsey said Sunday morning at a news conference Sunday morning hosted by the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression. "There is no middle ground in this fight. You are against racism, or you are for it. You have to make a decision."
Gerth, a graduate of Trinity High School and the University of Kentucky, is the godson of Courier Journal columnist Joe Gerth, and he was godfather to Joe's daughter.
A video of the incident from Saturday night posted on Facebook shows a man standing on a sidewalk and firing several shots toward the tents around 9 p.m. LMPD showed more footage on Sunday of a man firing into the air and then toward people.
Police locked down the scene in the aftermath, and a unit wearing riot gear arrived at approximately 10 p.m. Officers and remaining protesters got into a few small confrontations in the hours afterward as the investigation continued, but tear gas was not deployed and force was not used to clear the scene.
The park reopened around 8 a.m. Sunday, with tents and activists' other belongings cleared out by Metro Public Works officials.
LMPD announced early Sunday that people would no longer be able to stay overnight in the park, though protesters promised to be back.
"The community that was built there is not ending because they decided to throw us out," Shameka Parrish-Wright said at the Kentucky Alliance press conference. "We will be back. We're going to come back stronger, and we're not going to give up."
Police threw away several items that belonged to protesters, she said.
"I think it is very disrespectful," Parrish-Wright said. "I think that LMPD has been in contact with us, sending people through the park all the time we've been there, but they could not communicate effectively enough so that we could make sure people's belongings got to them."
In an afternoon press briefing, Police Chief Robert Schroeder, acknowledged that some property at the park was handled in a way that fell below the department's standards.
Louisvillians began taking to the streets May 28, just hours after the frantic 911 call made by Taylor's boyfriend in the immediate aftermath of her death was released to the public.
Seven people were shot by an unknown shooter on the first night of protests. The second night saw vandalism across much of downtown, leading to a 9 p.m. citywide curfew and Gov. Andy Beshear sending in the National Guard on May 30.
It was just after midnight on June 1 when Louisville Metro Police and National Guard members pulled up to Dino's Food Mart on West Broadway to disperse a "crowd." David McAtee, 53, died in the ensuing chaos, fatally shot by a member of the National Guard. Police said he was firing a gun.
Dorsey, the councilwoman for several West End neighborhoods and Shively, said Saturday night's shooting was a call to action.
"If Louisville does not show up, then we're not worth our salt," said Dorsey, who spoke before Tyler Gerth was announced as the victim. "And we're not the 'compassionate city' that we say we are. It's time for all of us to have the same cry: Justice for Breonna. Justice for David McAtee. Stand up. It is time to have your voice heard. You can no longer be silent."
Protesters at the park said Lopez had been present at the park before.
"He's been having issues here: stealing, drinking, starting fights," Fox said. "They've been trying to help him out here. Like, he stole a phone from somebody, and so what they did, instead of doing anything bad to him, they went and bought him a phone, to help him out."
According to witnesses from Saturday night — Fox and Maxwell Mitchell, who streamed the shooting live on Facebook — Lopez had an altercation with another protester, which led to security kicking him out of the park. He returned after a few hours with a gun, they said.
In the video, it's still daylight when multiple shots ring out as people scatter and hide. The alleged shooter is stopped by protesters, as people in the camp begin to call for medics and multiple people rush to help Gerth. Within minutes, the deputies are on scene, assisting with Gerth, and police and EMS sirens are heard approaching.
On Sunday afternoon at the park, there was a resilient but very somber mood as protesters looked to reorganize despite police prohibiting tents from being erected in the park and Gerth's killing, which weighed heavy on the minds of the many gathered.
Fox said he was near the shooter and helped stop him before turning his attention to Gerth. Fox said that when he closes his eyes now, he sees the victim in his mind.
"I haven't slept," Fox said on Sunday, tears in his eyes.
Fox said he was armed Saturday night and aimed at the suspect, but didn't fire.
"When I got here, I came straight to the spot where that kid died. I had to pay my respects to him. I felt guilty. I felt f---ing guilty because I didn't shoot that man."
Courier Journal reporters Hayes Gardner and Lucas Aulbach contributed to this story.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"If Louisville does not show up, then we're not worth our salt. And we're not the 'compassionate city' that we say we are. It's time for all of us to have the same cry: Justice for Breonna. Justice for David McAtee. Stand up. It is time to have your voice heard."
Metro Councilwoman Keisha Dorsey
Charles Gerth, father of the late Tyler Gerth, is hugged by protesters in Jefferson Square Park on Sunday. Tyler, a photographer, was shot and killed by a protester at the park the night before.
photos by Pat McDonogh / Courier Journal
Mourners raise their fists in the air during a vigil for Tyler Gerth.
A young man kneels in prayer before a vigil for Tyler Gerth, a photographer who was shot and killed in Jefferson Square Park on Saturday night.
$$$
