Guard: McAtee shooting showed 'measured response'
Sonka, Joe
11 June 2020
FRANKFORT — Kentucky's adjutant general said Wednesday he believes the investigation into the fatal shooting of David McAtee in Louisville will conclude the National Guard acted with a "measured response" that night.
J. Michael Brown, the secretary of Gov. Andy Beshear's Executive Cabinet, announced Tuesday that the fatal bullet striking McAtee on June 1 was fired by one of two Kentucky National Guard soldiers near McAtee's barbecue business at 26th Street and Broadway.
Asked at his daily press conference Wednesday if he regretted sending the National Guard to Louisville, Beshear stood by his decision, saying he believed it was necessary and important to have them there. He noted the seven protesters who were shot on May 28 and "some significant damage and real concerns for violence" the following day.
Beshear said he hoped by the end of a full investigation into McAtee's death, "everybody can look at that and make conclusions, both as to the incident itself and if they want to evaluate my call on the National Guard."
Brown, tasked with leading the Kentucky State Police investigation of the shooting, said evidence indicates McAtee fired two bullets "in the direction" of Louisville police officers and guardsmen, before both fired back at McAtee, who was near the doorway of his business.
In an emailed statement, Brig. Gen. Hal Lamberton, Kentucky's adjutant general, said he will continue to support a full and independent investigation "because it is the right thing to do and because we have high confidence in our Guardsmen."
"This civil unrest mission is one of the most difficult homeland missions we are asked to support," Lamberton said. "The Soldiers and Airmen we called upon are of the highest caliber, and we believe the investigation will conclude that it was a measured response from the National Guard that night."
The guard hasn't released the names of the two uniformed members who fired their rifles that night, but Wednesday's statement indicated the unit responding with LMPD the night of the shooting was the 138th Field Artillery Brigade, based in Lexington.
"This unit has been assigned the National Guard Reaction Force (NGRF) mission, and its Soldiers are required to train on law enforcement support-type missions," the guard statement reads. "The Guardsmen were directed to provide support to the LMPD in a State Active Duty status. Service members are armed for self-defense."
The guard reported to Louisville on May 30 at the request of Beshear and Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer to support LMPD in handling the widespread protests over the March 13 killing of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot eight times in her home by LMPD officers entering on a no-knock warrant.
The guard statement indicated its members were assisting LMPD that night "in dispersing a crowd after curfew" near the intersection.
Maj. Stephen Martin, spokesman for the Kentucky National Guard, told The Courier Journal on Wednesday that Beshear did not sign a specific order sending the guard to Louisville, instead giving that request verbally.
Martin added that while the guard remained under the direction of the adjutant general, the troops were there to support the local police and Lamberton gave "operational control" to LMPD.
Because of that, Martin said it was LMPD that made the decision to send the guardsmen to 26th and Broadway, not the adjutant general. The requested support of the guard ended Sunday.
Asked Wednesday about reassessing how the National Guard is used in the future, Beshear said he will look at "ensuring that we have more control over where the National Guard is deployed."
"Again, we're still getting more information on the 'why' and the decision, but having more direct access to that information on an ongoing basis is something that I'd certainly want to see," Beshear said.
The governor added that he does not know what McAtee was shooting at before he was killed, saying, "I don't want to suggest that I know what he thought in his head, and I don't know if we ever will."
Brown said Tuesday that McAtee "was clearly firing in (the officers') direction outside the door," saying that returning fire at McAtee would have been "part of their engagement" and "what any law enforcement officer would do."
Asked if LMPD officers fired pepper balls at people near the business before McAtee fired his gun, Brown said, "I don't know, really, about the actions of LMPD other than what I've seen in some of the videos you've seen."
McAtee's family and their attorney, Steve Romines, argue that LMPD officers irresponsibly fired pepper balls at those outside of McAtee's business and created the situation.
"LMPD started the whole situation by violating multiple policies and firing (pepper balls) continuously," Romines told The Courier Journal on Tuesday. "They want to ignore that."
Romines said McAtee likely fired his gun into the air and not at officers in order "to gain some sort of calm in this crazy situation." He also called it "absurd" that the government is "unleashing your own soldiers on your citizens with weapons of war" in order to enforce a curfew.
Brown said Tuesday that National Guard soldiers shot a total nine rounds at McAtee that night, while LMPD officers fired nine to 10 shots.
In addition to the Kentucky State Police and the guard, the FBI and LMPD are investigating the McAtee shooting.
Beshear said he is committed to ensuring that "all the facts come out in a transparent investigation," adding that there is still much evidence to gather, including witness statements and audio of the shooting.
Reach reporter Joe Sonka at jsonka@courierjournal.com or 502-582-4472 and follow him on Twitter at @joesonka. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courierjournal.com/subscribe.
Family and friends of David McAtee hold up candles and repeat his nickname, "Ya Ya," during a June 2 vigil near 26th Street and Broadway in Louisville's West End, where he was fatally shot by law enforcement.
$$$
