Friday football games halted
Frakes, Jason
25 Sep 2020
Jefferson County Public Schools announced Thursday that all high school football games scheduled for Thursday and Friday will be rescheduled for Saturday and Sunday.
The decision is a response to the 9 p.m. curfew set Wednesday for Louisville after the announcement in the Breonna Taylor case. The curfew is set to expire Monday morning.
Here's the new schedule for JCPS games:
Seneca at Atherton, 3 p.m. Saturday
Bullitt Central at Fairdale, 11 a.m. Saturday
Male at Butler, 3 p.m. Saturday
Iroquois at Doss, 11 a.m. Saturday
Fern Creek at Eastern, 7 p.m. Nov. 6
South Oldham at Jeffersontown, 7 p.m. Oct. 30
Manual at North Bullitt, 11 a.m. Saturday
Waggener at North Oldham, 7:30 p.m. Oct. 2
Western at Pleasure Ridge Park, 1 p.m. Sunday
Carroll County at Shawnee, 11:30 a.m. Saturday
John Hardin at Valley, 3 p.m. Sunday
Kentucky Country Day at Southern, 11 a.m. Saturday
Central at Meade County, noon Saturday
George Rogers Clark at Ballard, not rescheduled
Practices and games in other sports may continue Thursday, as long as they comply with the curfew.
The George Rogers Clark at Ballard football game scheduled for Friday was canceled before the announcement made by JCPS on Thursday, Ballard athletic director Chris Kinney said.
Kinney declined to comment further, but George Rogers Clark coach Oliver Lucas said the decision was made by administrators at his school in light of the protests in Louisville surrounding the Breonna Taylor case.
"Our district had concerns in regards to ... the whole outside extracurriculars, I guess," said Lucas, who was the head coach at Manual from 2010-15 before taking the GRC job in 2017. "I don't think anyone understood that Ballard really is so many miles away from that type of stuff downtown, as well as being in one of the most influential areas in Louisville."
Later Thursday, Ballard announced it has added a home game against Frederick Douglass at 11 a.m. Saturday.
On Tuesday, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer declared a state of emergency for the city "due to the potential for civil unrest." On Wednesday, a Jefferson County grand jury indicted one of three Louisville officers in the March 13 fatal police shooting of Taylor. During Wednesday night protests in downtown Louisville, two Louisville Metro Police officers were shot.
The Trinity-St. Xavier football game scheduled for Friday was rescheduled for Oct. 2. Holy Cross' home game against Providence (Indiana) was rescheduled for noon Saturday. Central, located in downtown Louisville, moved its game out of the city to Meade County on Saturday.
Ballard opened its season last week with a 27-0 victory at Fern Creek. The Bruins haven't played a home game since Nov. 2, 2018, when they defeated Daviess County 33-7 in the first round of the Class 6A playoffs. Ballard played all of its 2019 games on the road as the school tore down and then rebuilt its football stadium.
Kinney said Ballard is looking to fill an opening on its schedule for Oct. 2. The Bruins are scheduled to play at Trinity on Oct. 9 before hosting Eastern on Oct. 16.
Jason Frakes: 502-582-4046; jfrakes@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @kyhighs. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/jasonf.
Ballard's Kenton Jackson scores a touchdown in the first quarter against Fern Creek on Sept. 18.
$$$
