Police and city must think outside the box
16 Aug 2020
Regarding the $300,000 the Louisville Metro Police Department spent on pepper balls, munitions and flash grenades: What part of rethinking policing tactics don't you get? Is there always going to be a war-like approach to hold protesters back?
Here's a different way Louisville can productively spend $300,000 and gain momentum with the peaceful protesters: Take that money to direct the protests to a more peaceful place, say a park or outdoor stadium. Encourage protesters to come and entice them with food, drink and most importantly public figures who can speak to the protesters about where the Breonna Taylor investigations are going. Also give protesters a chance to respond. They need to be heard.
Forcing protesters away with pepper spray, grenades and flash bangs serve only to incite anger, which is likely to exacerbate an already angry group.
Trish McDermott
Browns Summit, NC 27214
Harris selection shows changing times The song, "The Times They Are a Changin'," written by Bob Dylan in 1963, was certainly appropriate then as it is now. The "I Have A Dream Speech" that the late Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. delivered on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial on Aug. 28 that same year did change the times.
Former Vice President Joe Biden's selection of Sen. Kamala Harris as his running mate is historic and exciting for "these times." She has the experience, she is tough, she is smart, she is a leader, and she is a woman of color. Kudos to Mr. Biden – a man who has empathy, compassion and heart – for his choice as a running mate. Looking down the road, the senator one day could be president.
"...Come senators, congressmen, please heed the call. Don't stand in the doorway, don't block up the hall. For he that gets hurt will be he who has stalled. For the battle outside ragin will soon shake your windows and rattle your walls. For the times they are a changin."
Claudia S. Geurin
Louisville, 40291
Black lives should matter in all cases It was a tragedy that Breonna Taylor died as a result of a bungled police action. Protesters took to the streets to show their anger. I could understand their feelings for all the years of Black mistreatment at the hands of the Louisville Police Department. As a result they coined the motto "Black Lives Matter." I don't believe anybody could argue with that statement.
However, I have a problem with the statement "Black Lives Matter." Every day Black men and women are shot and killed and not by the police. If the protesters are serious that BLM, then why aren't they marching through the West End every night demanding justice for those Blacks who have been murdered. Breonna is just one Black person who was killed, but after her death there have been more than 20 Black people murdered and only the police seem interested in finding the guilty parties.
I hope this doesn't mean that Black people killing other Black people does not count in the protesters' minds, or that "Black Lives Matters" only when shot by police. That is a question because all lives count.
Robert Leonard Young
Pendleton, Ky. 40055
Postmaster general and voter suppression Discouraging mail-in voting is a form of voter suppression that unequally affects Black Americans. It also will unequally affect Latinos, the disabled and the elderly during this pandemic. Postmaster General Louis DeJoy's recent policy has slowed down mail services and will decrease trust in the United States Postal Service. (Courier Journal, Aug. 8) It will have the effect of discouraging mail-in voting and is a racist policy. It also discourages a healthy democracy and is un-American.
Russell Hoffman
Louisville, 40223
Legacy of Republican and Democratic administrations Recent history provides a clear record regarding the actions carried out by the Republicans and Democrats who govern our country. There are distinct patterns in both the elections and the results of those elections. Bush/Cheney lost the vote but were awarded the presidency because of our outdated electoral process. Bush/Cheney took over a thriving economy from Bill Clinton. But by the time of the 2008 election, they handed Barack Obama an economy in dangerous free fall. In his eight years of office Obama steadily stabilized the U.S. economy and brought it back to health. Then came the strangely stigmatized 2016 election of Donald Trump, who publicly solicited foreign interference from Russia and China. Again, the Republican lost the vote but was awarded the office. And once again the Republican leadership under Trump has destroyed the American economy. Additionally, the scandalous ineptitude of Donald Trump has led to the unnecessary deaths of tens of thousands of Americans. And so the pattern continues in our recent history. Republicans wreck the country and Democrats have to put the pieces back together to save us from utter disaster.
$$$
