Courier Journal sues city officials
Costello, Darcy
21 July 2020
The Courier Journal is filing suit over a series of teleconferences between Louisville Metro Council and Mayor Greg Fischer in which city officials discussed the COVID-19 pandemic and demonstrations for racial justice.
The meetings, held roughly twice a week over months, were not available to the public despite the nature of the calls — which attorneys allege in a lawsuit filed in Jefferson Circuit Court were "in secret, in clear violation of the Open Meetings Law."
"In these times of important public debate about issues like the pandemic and racial justice, the public has a right to know what the main decision-makers in their community are discussing," said attorney Casey Hinkle, who is representing The Courier Journal.
City officials acknowledge the meetings have taken place but have claimed the calls between Metro Council and Fischer are not subject to the Open Meetings Act.
In a July letter responding to a Courier Journal complaint, Assistant County Attorney M. Holliday Hopkins, on behalf of the Louisville Metro Council, writes that the conference calls "offer an opportunity for members to pose ... questions to the Mayor's office during a period when the Mayor's time is severely limited."
Hopkins additionally claims the calls do not fall under Open Meetings Law because no legislation was discussed and "not all discussions between public officials constitute public business."
Metro Council, she writes, couldn't take action relating to the governor's and mayor's COVID-19 orders, and the discussion of daily protests was "to enable them to answer the many questions they were receiving."
"Council did not have the option of taking action in the streets," Hopkins said. "No votes were taken, nor were any collective decisions or promises made by members."
Michael Abate, an attorney representing The Courier Journal, said Monday that the city has taken an "absurdly narrow view of what it means to be discussing public business."
When a quorum of the Metro Council is meeting, they can talk about the weather, but if they "start talking about city business, it's a public meeting."
"That's a basic point that all public officials understand well — including those on Metro Council," Abate said. "Times of crisis are the most important times for transparency, not an excuse to create new regimes for secret meetings."
Richard Green, The Courier Journal's editor, said taxpayers deserve to know about the conversations by Fischer and Metro Council members and have a chance to both monitor and participate in them.
"These calls weren't about the mayor's garden. They weren't about UK recruiting or how the Cardinals will do against Clemson in September. These were pre-arranged, scheduled and organized calls to discuss the public's business," Green said.
"What issues confronting Louisville right now are more important than this coronavirus health crisis or the justice-for-Breonna Taylor protests? The answer is simple: Nothing. Kentucky's Open Meetings Law couldn't be any clearer, and we believe city officials violated it while cheating the public's right-to-know in the process."
In The Courier Journal's lawsuit, attorneys write that the calls "were discussions between the Mayor and Metro Council (not merely the Mayor providing information to the Council), and were convened to discuss public business."
Hinkle added Monday that the calls were not "one-sided, informational calls, where the mayor was simply informing the council of actions he was taking." Rather, the council appears to have been "actively engaged in discussion with the mayor about appropriate steps to take."
Records obtained by The Courier Journal through an open records request show that, in March, Fischer invited Metro Council members to conference calls "to share updates, discuss strategy and provide an opportunity for you all to ask questions or share how we can be supportive."
In one April note, Teresa Lajara, the administration's liaison to the Metro Council, thanks the members for "your time, ideas and feedback."
"We hope these calls have been as helpful to you as they have been for us," she writes.
Other meetings, records show, discussed disbursement of COVID-19 funds, the senior meal delivery program and, possibly, the city's budget.
Daniel Frockt, the city's chief financial officer, joined a call on March 31, about two and a half weeks before Louisville furloughed 380 city employees and about a month before Fischer's budget proposal.
In May, the mayor and council members were also joined by Amy Hess, the chief of public safety, and Cathy Duncan, director of facilities management and fleet operations, to discuss reopening Metro facilities.
These calls, attorneys point out in the lawsuit, were not open to the public, held in accordance with a public schedule or through special meetings notices, conducted in-person or by video conference or memorialized by meeting minutes.
The suit requests an expedited briefing schedule and hearing and an injunction ordering Metro Council to hold future meetings with the mayor in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello.
Participants in the Youth March for Freedom walk down Market Street on July 4.
$$$
