minute by minute
Kachmar, Kala
21 June 2020
Two minutes and 13 seconds after authorities pulled up to the intersection, McAtee lay dead in his kitchen from a single bullet wound to the chest fired from a guard rifle.
It was about 12:15 a.m. June 1 when a black sedan with flashing police lights pulled up on West Broadway next to Dino's Food Mart.
Rolling up close behind in single file came five white, unmarked vans filled with Louisville Metro Police officers and two armored vehicles full of National Guard troops.
They were dispatched to break up what they called a "crowd" violating the city's 9 p.m. curfew in the Dino's parking lot at 26th and Broadway that evening.
Two days of vandalism and looting – which erupted after daylong peaceful protests over the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman – prompted Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer to ask the governor to send in the Kentucky National Guard.
Gov. Andy Beshear agreed, deploying troops to the city on May 30. It was the first time National Guard troops patrolled the streets of Louisville since 1975.
Two days later, while dozens of officers and guard members were dispersing people scattered outside the food mart, at least one police officer fired pepper balls, police said and security video shows.
Then, chaos erupted.
In less than three minutes, a life was lost and a neighborhood rocked.
Now, an already outraged and grieving city is holding its breath while local, state and federal officials investigate the death of David McAtee, a beloved West End figure who owned a YaYa's BBQ stand across the street from Dino's.
Two minutes and 13 seconds after authorities pulled up to the intersection, McAtee lay dead in his kitchen from a single bullet wound to the chest fired from a guard rifle. Police contend that McAtee fired first, which prompted two officers and two National Guard members to return fire, shooting 19 rounds.
Against department policy, the two LMPD officers – Katie Crews and Austin Allen – were not wearing or did not turn on body cameras. Attorneys for the McAtee family have said LMPD violated many of its own policies and questioned why police and troops were sent to a place where there were no protests.
The 53-year-old's death and the circumstances behind it has heightened the pressure on city and police officials as the community demands answers, justice and reform in both the McAtee and Taylor cases.
The Courier Journal used witness interviews, statements from police and state officials and security camera footage released to the public to recreate the events that led to McAtee's death.
There were no timestamps on the footage to indicate precise moments, but police say they arrived about 12:15 a.m. The flashing lights when police arrive can be seen in two surveillance videos police have released: a view of Dino's from street camera footage and exterior view of YaYa's outside, so it's clear the event occurred between about 12:15 a.m. to 12:18 a.m.
This is what happened.
A typical night at Dino's The parking lot and area around Dino's at 26th and Broadway is a popular gathering place for locals.
The night of May 31 was no different despite the curfew.
Aerial street camera views show about 25 cars parked in Dino's parking lot, with a few more cars parked haphazardly on the 26th Street sidewalk near the mart about 12:15 a.m., just before police arrive.
About 20 people can be seen on video walking through the parking lot, coming in and out of the store.
Although large and loud protests filled the streets downtown and along Bardstown Road that evening, the video shows no signs of protesting or demonstrations at 26th and Broadway.
The parking lot has had incidents of violence, police and nearby residents say, but there were no reports this night.
What officers and troops did next At 12:15 a.m. June 1, as the police and guard vehicles pull up, at least eight vehicles can be seen leaving the parking lot immediately. A few people run north, out of camera view.
At least 30 officers and guard members immediately exit their vehicles parked on Broadway and form a loose line. Most walk onto the gas station and store property behind several gas pumps, while a few officers go into the store, scattering more bystanders.
One police officer, Crews, captured on the street camera footage, veers off from her colleagues, walking around the eastern edge of the lot in front of the gas pumps.
The cameras show no evidence that police or guard members are using force to disperse the crowd.
A Facebook video streamed by a bystander, Kris Smith, who was taking video from his SUV parked in front of Dino's, shows officers and troops telling people to leave as they walked through the area.
Pepper balls fired One minute and 39 seconds after police arrive, the street-view camera shows Crews crossing 26th Street. She's aiming a weapon at the ground.
Two seconds later, she crosses in front of a burgundy-colored car and appears to raise her weapon. Her forearms are parallel to the ground. The outdoor view of YaYa's confirms she fired pepper balls 1 minute and 41 seconds after police arrive.
A man dragging a roller suitcase walks away from her, then dodges pepper balls that create clouds of smoke on the ground. This interaction can be seen in both videos.
The man who flees is near a group of people lingering outside McAtee's stand, YaYa's BBQ. Crews fires pepper balls at the group of people, who rush into McAtee's business, which is also his home.
The barbecue stand at 677 26th St. is in a private driveway across the street from the entrance to Dino's.
A blue tent canopy at the edge of the driveway acts as a "takeout window," said Marvin McAtee, David McAtee's nephew and business partner.
Marvin McAtee said his car, which he parked in front of the tent to prevent too many people from congregating nearby, had at least four dents from pepper balls that night.
David McAtee's family and friends inside the building that night said they didn't know the people rushing in. Nor did they know what was being fired, or who was shooting, they told The Courier Journal.
The video shows Crews briskly walking up to a nearby fence line, firing pepper balls, hitting what appears to be a soft drink can on a small table under the YaYa's tent.
She continues to shoot pepper balls into the doorway of the business as people are inside.
Attorneys for McAtee's family released photos they say show his niece, Maychell McAtee, was struck by pepper balls at least three times. She was standing in the doorway, surveillance video shows.
Interior security video shows her jerk back into the door from a sudden impact, while exterior video simultaneously shows puffs of smoke from the fired pepper balls.
The video captures the female officer shooting pepper balls into the building while a male officer is behind her.
Exactly two minutes after the initial police sedan pulls up, at roughly 12:17 a.m., the video shows the officer suddenly stop and jog a few steps backward before she reaches for her holstered pistol.
From Smith's cellphone footage, officers and guard members can be seen suddenly taking cover behind cars in the Dino's lot.
Two minutes and 8 seconds after police arrive, the exterior camera captures smoke and bullets flying near the entrance of YaYa's door, buffeting the top of the takeout tent.
Mayhem in McAtee's kitchen Less than a minute before the strangers rushed into his business, David McAtee can be seen walking back and forth to the driveway, carrying meat from the grill with tongs.
Then, once he is back inside, the strangers start to rush in. Marvin McAtee said they rushed downstairs to David McAtee's basement apartment to hide.
Some of them hid in a dank utility room, and others threw themselves in a giant mound of laundry piled in one of the basement rooms.
In the kitchen, McAtee can be seen trying to get to the doorway, the interior camera shows.
He grabs something holstered at his right hip as he peers out the door. State authorities later identify it as a 9 mm Jimenez handgun.
After making it through the crowd to the door, and as his niece is struck by some projectile, McAtee can be seen raising his arm out the door, although his hand is obscured from view. He closes the door for a few seconds before raising his arm again.
Police and state authorities say McAtee was firing a gun when he raises his arm, and they say they recovered two spent shell casings in the driveway. McAtee raises his arm the first time roughly 1 minute and 58 seconds after police arrive.
Almost instantly, as McAtee raised his arm a second time about 2 minutes and 8 seconds after police arrive, he is hit by gunfire from outside. He stumbles back into the kitchen, dropping something on the floor, then falls.
That's where he dies.
Behind him, the video shows his niece pointing at a handgun on the floor in front of the door.
After the shooting ends Police said they recovered seven firearms from McAtee's place that night, including the handgun they say he fired. Marvin McAtee said several of the other recovered guns belonged to the strangers who ran in.
The basement lights were off, so those who trampled through ended up breaking a lot of David McAtee's belongings, he said.
Marvin McAtee followed them downstairs at first, where he realized they were hiding, then made his way back upstairs to the door just as his uncle was shot, he said.
Meanwhile, the officers on the scene were trying to secure the perimeter and figure out what's going on. Officers in radio transmission recordings indicated one or more shots were fired from the northwest side of Dino's – from a south-facing door.
LMPD officials later said there was a gunshot fired from "the crowd," but security footage and radio transmissions don't indicate that was the case.
"We took fire from the small building just to east of Dino's across 26th Street. Small gray building. We have people barricaded in that building," one officer said in radio transmissions.
"I need all the officers out there near the building to back up. We'll set up a perimeter, find cover," another officer said.
Another officer called for all available marked units – with shields – from the Fifth Division to go to the corner on 28th Street.
"We don't know if we have suspects inside. There was an exchange of gunfire," another officer said.
"There was one female and one suspect that was possibly shot. We're working on getting them out now," an officer said.
"We're going to need medics."
Several officers via radio described at least two individuals seen running from David McAtee's gray building following the shootout.
"We are not chasing," one officer said.
"He's unarmed, he's unarmed," another said.
Marvin McAtee said he made two 911 calls – the first to report the shooting and ask for an ambulance and the second to make sure people who were about to run out other doors wouldn't get shot by police.
The Courier Journal has requested all 911 calls related to the shooting, but authorities have not responded to an open records request for them.
Marvin McAtee said he ran to the kitchen, where he found his uncle and best friend.
"My mind is going to two different places, but I'm already looking in his eyes knowing that he's dead," he told The Courier Journal.
He said his next thought was protecting his family's business. But he also had to deal with the scared people hiding in the basement.
"When you see their eyes, when you see the fear they had, I had a soft spot," Marvin McAtee said. "I called 911, and I specifically said these people want to get out of here, they don't mean no harm."
Police eventually told Marvin McAtee they were going to come in and everyone should keep their hands up. Marvin McAtee said he was taken to the police department and held until 7 a.m.
He wasn't charged.
What the investigation has found so far The investigation into David McAtee's death is being led by J. Michael Brown, secretary of Beshear's Executive Cabinet and a former deputy attorney general, in conjunction with state police and FBI – at Beshear's behest.
LMPD is conducting an internal investigation per department policy with state police oversight.
Police officials and Brown say based on video and ballistics evidence, McAtee fired his weapon at least twice that night.
McAtee was killed by a single, military-grade 5.56 mm M855 bullet used by the National Guard, Brown said.
Four bullet shards taken from McAtee's body were too mangled to determine which guard member's rifle fired the shot. The National Guard hasn't identified the two members involved in the shooting.
Officers Crews and Allen have been placed on reassignment pending the investigations.
Steve Romines, an attorney for McAtee's family, and witnesses with McAtee that night, say that he was reacting to the crowd of strangers who rushed into his business, followed by "unknown" projectiles – pepper balls – that were fired into his doorway and at his niece.
They also say McAtee would never fire at police.
LMPD officials concede they don't know what McAtee was aiming at when he fired his gun.
"He was clearly firing in (the officers') direction outside the door," Brown said.
Returning fire at McAtee would have been "part of their engagement" and "what any law enforcement officer would do," Brown added.
Romines said he is outraged that the investigation so far has ignored LMPD policy failures leading up to the shooting: not wearing or not using body cameras; not following standard procedures for dispersing crowds; and not announcing themselves as law enforcement when they crossed the street from their initial location, among others.
On June 2, Fischer said the lack of body camera footage was an "institutional failure" and quickly fired then-Chief Steve Conrad, who'd been leading the department since March 2012.
He was set to retire at the end of June.
"David McAtee's death is a tragedy – for his family, for our community, and for the nation. I will continue working with our residents to build the community that David loved into a just and equitable community," Fischer said.
The investigation continues.
Kala Kachmar is an investigative reporter. Reach her at 502-582-4469.
Two minutes and 13 seconds after authorities pulled up to the intersection, McAtee lay dead in his kitchen from a single bullet wound to the chest fired from a guard rifle.
Find more online
See the surveillance video from the shooting at courierjournal.com.
Flowers and gifts adorn a fence outside the building in Louisville's West End where law enforcement officers fatally shot David McAtee, a 53-year-old Black restaurant owner.
Bailey Loosemore/Courier Journal
West End business owner David McAtee was killed on June 1.
$$$
