Metro Corrections bans neck restraints after Floyd's death
Kobin, Billy
14 June 2020
The Louisville Metro Department of Corrections has banned its jail officers from using neck restraints, joining a movement around the world to end the technique following the death of George Floyd.
Metro Corrections Maj. Jerry Collins, in an email sent Tuesday to Metro Corrections staff that was obtained by The Courier Journal, said "vascular restraints" will be prohibited starting "immediately."
"Vascular restraint technique is being pointed to nationally as an often misused or misapplied technique that has led to tragic results," Collins wrote. "Many agencies have been scrutinized nationally for these techniques and we are going to be proactive in protecting staff and our inmate population."
Collins said that Metro Corrections is "joining a national trend and following law enforcement agencies," including the Louisville Metro Police Department, that have discontinued the technique due to it potentially causing "serious injury" and "death."
"We will teach how to respond and defend against another person attempting to use this technique and you will learn current safer control options that the department has adopted," Collins added.
Police departments not only around the U.S. but also in various countries have moved to ban the use of neck restraints after the death of Floyd in Minneapolis.
Floyd, a 46-year-old Black man, died May 25 after a white Minneapolis Police Department officer knelt on Floyd's neck for nearly nine minutes.
The officer had pinned a handcuffed Floyd to the ground after he allegedly resisted arrest over using a counterfeit $20 bill to buy cigarettes at a convenience store.
Video that captured the fatal encounter went viral, and the officers at the scene of Floyd's arrest have since been fired and charged with murder or aiding and abetting murder.
Floyd's death has sparked protests around the country and globe over police brutality and the killings of people of color at the hands of law enforcement.
In Louisville, demonstrators have also taken to the streets to protest the fatal law enforcement shootings of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee.
Earlier this week, Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear's administration also announced that all of the commonwealth's law enforcement officers must complete an eight-hour course on topics such as implicit bias, use of force and civil rights laws by the end of the calendar year.
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com or 502-582-7030. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
A man walks past a mural showing the face of George Floyd, the unarmed Black man who died after a white policeman knelt on his neck during an arrest in Minnesota. The mural has the text reading "I can't breathe."
$$$
