Song has no place in today's world
05 Sep 2020
If there was ever a time to stop, it's now.
The festivity and the pageantry and the crowds and the drunks will not be there this year. It was the perfect opportunity for Churchill Downs to break with tradition and do away with another hallmark of the race.
"My Old Kentucky Home."
Churchill Downs blew it.
The coronavirus has killed off 187,000 Americans. the track should have let COVID-19 kill this off, too.
With the Kentucky Derby being run amid the coronavirus pandemic and during protests over the deaths of Breonna Taylor and other Black people around the country at the hands of police, now was the time to get rid of the song.
It's an elegy to a time when slavery here was supposed to be better than slavery further south, where the masters and conditions were considered to be more inhumane.
I wrote last year that Churchill needs to ban the song at the Derby, that colleges and universities should stop playing it at football and basketball games, and the Kentucky General Assembly should end its run as Kentucky's state song.
I had planned to not write about the song this year, not wanting to add fuel to the sizable fire out there surrounding race and the systemic racism that has led to this reckoning with how white people and Black people are treated differently.
There is enough to deal with as we have had daily protests in Louisville for 100 days now and an African American Armed militia coming to town for the Kentucky Derby.
But The Courier Journal reported Thursday that Churchill Downs, at that point, had not decided if it would play the song this year. Friday, it announced that it would go ahead and play the song, but include a moment of silence.
But if it took that long to make the decision, don't you figure they had to know that having the track's bugler blast the song out is wrong?
And not just this year, but every year.
The song, as it was written, used the antiquated and offensive term "darkies" or some version of it, three times.
In 1986, after a group of students from Japan came to Kentucky and performed the song at the Capitol — using the word — the state legislature changed the first verse to say "'tis summer, the old folks are gay."
But the term remains in the other two verses, which we just don't sing because they are so damn depressing.
Some argue that Stephen Foster was an abolitionist and that his song about slavery in Kentucky was meant to humanize slaves by telling of a miserable man whose life was soon to be more miserable when he was sold down the river to a master who owned a sugar cane plantation.
But the problem is that the song just doesn't translate to modern times. It especially doesn't translate when it is sung in a rousing, celebratory manner as it is when 150,000 fans — many of them drunk after a long day of mint juleps — pack into Churchill Downs for the Derby.
The melody is beautiful but the words aren't.
And while the words won't be sung Saturday, it's hard to divorce the two after so many years.
The lyrics tell of a dark time in our history that should be left to history books and not celebrated in song.
Not anymore.
Especially when we're dealing with the issues that we're dealing with now.
It's a song about the antebellum South in which — at least in Foster's mind — it was better to be a slave in Kentucky than in Louisiana or Mississippi or Alabama.
Is that what we really want to be known for?
"Welcome to Kentucky, where we treated our slaves like chattel but at least we didn't make them work in the oppressing heat of the bayou."
Few institutions in Kentucky have the horsepower to push Kentucky's elected officials in the right direction. Churchill Downs does.
As long as we're breaking with tradition at the Derby by running it without fans and without the celebration that goes along with it, we had the chance to break with this other tradition, too.
Churchill's dithering over whether to break with that tradition shows it knew the song is not appropriate. Not now. But it blinked.
So when you watch the Derby on your television this weekend, turn down the sound on the tube, lift your glass of bourbon and salute the state by listening to "Blue Moon of Kentucky," the "Kentucky Waltz" or even "Eight More Miles to Louisville."
It is the hometown of my heart.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
$$$
