Crowds dispersed, but we stayed. What one Courier Journal photographer saw during protests
Clevenger, Michael
31 May 2020
The protest began like many that I've seen before.
Chants of "No Peace, No Justice" and "Say Her Name" in reference to the shooting of Breonna Taylor, who was shot and killed by Louisville Metro Police in mid-March while sleeping in her apartment, filled the air. Most protesters had their phones up, scanning back and forth to show the size of the growing crowd in downtown Louisville. While it "felt" the same at first, the fact that a large Megabus parked on the north side of the intersection of 6th and Jefferson streets was blocking traffic was immediately different.
The protest was peaceful at that location, with organizers strongly urging protesters to lock arms and stay in line. I heard a woman with a bullhorn trying to keep order. A short time after it began, around 8:30 p.m., a large group broke away and headed down Jefferson Street and then to the Clark Memorial Bridge at Second Street.
I continued to take photos as protesters and police met face to face at the base of the bridge. Organizers urged protesters not to provoke the police, to remain calm. At one point, a small group of people locked arms to keep protesters from getting too close to a Louisville police officer who had been backed up to a Bearno's Pizza restaurant.
Things began to slowly become more agitated between police and protesters. The organizers tried to keep some sense of calm, often putting themselves in between both groups and, in the end, encouraged the group to disband. Some left, others stayed.
I stayed. The five other Courier Journal photographers also covering the protest stayed.
Police used paintball guns and pepper balls to try to disperse the crowd and tear gas hung in the air over 6th and Jefferson as protesters tried to advance on the police with a line of picnic table used as shields.
It was surreal.
Most of the photographers on the Courier Journal staff grew up in Louisville – it's our home. Every single one of us hated to witness a night like Thursday, much less see these images through our camera viewfinders.
It's a day the photo staff hoped we would never experience and hope not to see again.
Reach photographer Michael Clevenger at mclevenger@gannett.com. Follow him on Twitter at @MClevenger_CJ.
Protesters surround an LMPD cruiser at the foot of the Clark Memorial Bridge on May 28.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Louisville Metro police and protesters face off as police attempt to remove patrol cars from the crowd.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
A woman is comforted after she was injured during the demonstration at Sixth and Jefferson Streets.
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
A Louisville officer prepares to fire a paintball gun early Friday morning as the deaths of Breonna Taylor and Minneapolis' George Floyd at the hands of police spurred protests.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Scenes from a protest in downtown Louisville over the shooting of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police. Organizers rally the crowd in the intersection of Sixth and Jefferson streets.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
A demonstrator covers his face and runs as Louisville Metro Police shoot tear gas canisters near Sixth and Jefferson streets.
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Organizers rally the crowd in the intersection of Sixth and Jefferson streets.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
A protester offers an LMPD officer flowers the a protest.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Officers hold batons and some fire paintball guns at protesters early Friday morning.
$$$
