Louisville athletes confront injustice
Robinson, Cameron Teague
16 June 2020
Protests have sparked around the country with countless people taking to the streets of their cities to voice their displeasure with racial injustice and police brutality in the world.
Those issues aren't new and haven't been forgotten in Louisville, where Breonna Taylor, an African American woman, was fatally shot by police in her apartment on March 13.
While the protests became national news, Louisville cornerback Anthony Johnson wanted to do something to show his support for the cause. With the COVID-19 pandemic still alive, he was originally going to wait until it calmed down some.
"I just thought, 'Why wait? This is happening now so I feel like this would be the best time,'" Johnson said.
So as one of the leaders on the Cardinals' defense, he set up a peaceful walk with the team, some of the coaching staff and administrators along the Big Four Bridge. There was one caveat, though. Louisville's players didn't want to wear their jerseys.
For much of their careers, athletes are thought of as a number on a roster that people cheer for. In this instance, a May 30 protest that featured signs and COVID-19 masks, Johnson said he wanted people to see them as "law-abiding citizens."
"Despite our athletic abilities, we are able to have regular conversations and are educated. We are loving, caring and just things like that versus just seeing us scoring touchdowns or making tackles," Johnson said. "We wanted to show a different approach to the community. We love everyone, if you are a Cardinal fan or not."
As protests continue around the country and more teams join in, athletes are showing the platform they have to speak out. It's not something Johnson takes for granted.
A Coconut Creek, Florida, native, Johnson has been more engaged with the community now than he was before racial injustice became the main topic in the country. But as both a leader — he is expected to be Louisville's No. 2 corner next season — and somebody with family who are law enforcement he felt the need to speak up.
"I felt like this was my opportunity to take the initiative for the guys who didn't want to speak up and show that we are all in this together and that no matter what we can lean on each other," Johnson said. "I just took this as an opportunity to show what God is doing in my life and hopefully touch someone, even if it's just one person to touch someone and help change someone. That was my approach."
And his teammates are with him as well. Many have done just that. Players such as defensive end Dayna Kinnaird, wide receiver Dez Fitzpatrick, quarterback Micale Cunningham and linebacker C.J. Avery have gone to Twitter to express their opinions. But it's not just football players. Dana Evans and Kianna Smith from the women's basketball team have gone on record about the protests as well, among others.
It's a trend that has swept across the nation to ACC foes Clemson, Florida State and more.
That's something Johnson likes to see and his teammates encourage regardless of what the backlash might be.
"Being college athletes, we have one of the biggest platforms there is. They try to minimize it ... but throughout this process, our teammates speaking out is good," Johnson said. "Not to hold those emotions in, but to really show how they feel and get it off their chest and not to have resentment or anything inside. Just to express themselves and not feel judged or feel like they have to sugar coat their tweets or whatever they're posting because they will be judged but just to be free to post and knowing they'll be respected and hear their voice will be heard."
Louisville football isn't done with protesting or helping the community. It did its walk and had a few players help clean up the city one afternoon, but Johnson said he is working with Chris Morgan, U of L's Fellowship of Christian Athletes leader, on another event in the coming days.
They are also working on shirts that will be shared among members of the Louisville athletic department, although the design isn't finished. But the message, as it was when Johnson and the Cardinals did their first walk, is around the idea of unity.
And they'll be wearing those shirts often, as part of the community.
$$$
