James wears Taylor's name on his shoes
Austin, Emma
25 July 2020
After playing in the Lakers' first scrimmage Thursday night with Breonna Taylor's name written on his shoes, LeBron James used the post-game press conference to call attention to her case and the Black Lives Matter movement.
"First of all, I want to continue to shed light on justice for Breonna Taylor and to her family and everything that's going on with that situation," he said in response to a question about the game.
When he was asked what he wants the next step to be, James said he wants the cops "who committed that crime" arrested.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was killed on March 13 by police who were executing a "no-knock" search warrant at her home and shot her five times. Police were wearing plain clothes and not using body cameras during the raid. Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, said he believed they were intruders when he shot once as a warning, hitting one of the three officers in the leg before they returned fire, killing Taylor.
One of the officers, Brett Hankison, was fired in June after interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder determined he "blindly" fired 10 rounds into Taylor's apartment.
The other two officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and Officer Myles Cosgrove, remain on administrative reassignment.
James said Thursday "it was fortunate" there was video of what happened to George Floyd, a Black man killed during an arrest after a white police officer knelt on his neck for 8 minutes, sparking protests across the world.
"I mean, is that what we need — to see a video of Breonna being killed — for people to realize how bad the situation was?" James said.
When a reporter attempted to steer his answers back toward the game with a question about his team's energy on the floor, he responded again with a call for justice.
"The same energy that we have on the floor is the same energy we have towards having justice for Breonna Taylor," he said.
James also spoke against describing Black Lives Matter as a movement.
"It's not a movement," he said. "I hate to — I don't like the word movement because unfortunately in America and society, there ain't been no damn movement for us."
Lakers forward and former UK star Anthony Davis also spoke about Taylor after the scrimmage and said he was happy to stand on James' side and speak out with him.
"He's the top player in the league. He speaks on a lot of issues and he likes to voice his opinion on a lot of topics," Davis said. "When he speaks, obviously his name and his worth holds a lot of weight. So when he speaks, a lot of people listen."
USA TODAY NBA writer Mark Medina contributed reporting.
Reach trending reporter Emma Austin at eaustin@gannett.com or on Twitter at @emmacaustin.
LeBron James was just the latest NBA player to use his media availability to discuss the death of Breonna Taylor.
$$$
