Black Louisvillians for many years have felt excluded from the Kentucky Derby
BAILEY LOOSEMORE
04 Sep 2020
The Kentucky Derby was always a time of celebration for Timothy Findley's family and friends.
But never because of the horse race itself.
Findley, a Black pastor, instead recalls backyard barbecues, cruising on West Broadway and family get-togethers that took place on the first Saturday in May — becoming separate traditions for Black Louisvillians who say they feel disconnected from the city's most recognized event.
"In this segregated city that we live in, (the Derby) was never something that we were a part of," Findley said. "I'd even venture to say it's something we've never felt invited to be a part of."
That's why Findley and other Black residents say they felt insulted by recent comments from Churchill Downs CEO Bill Carstanjen, who said the Derby serves as an "important part of healing" and unity amid racial unrest that's erupted nationwide.
Since late May, protesters have demanded justice for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was shot and killed by Louisville Metro Police officers at her apartment in south Louisville on March 13.
As part of the demonstrations, Findley and others have called on Churchill Downs to cancel the Derby as a statement against police brutality and racial injustice. And large protests are expected Saturday outside the track in response to its running.
The pastor is also asking the company to support "A Path Forward for Louisville," a document created by local Black leaders that lays out solutions for addressing racial inequities in the city, including the creation of a $50 million Black Community Fund for small businesses and affordable housing.
But while the race was rescheduled for September and will exclude fans because of the coronavirus pandemic, Carstanjen has said "the community in general overwhelmingly supports" continuing with the race.
"We know there are some who disagree with our decision to run the Kentucky Derby this year," the company said in a statement Thursday. "We respect that point of view but made our decision in the belief that traditions can remind us of what binds us together as Americans, even as we seek to acknowledge and repair the terrible pain that rends us apart."
The decision to continue with the race has led some Black residents to feel the company doesn't truly stand behind its unifying message.
"There's potential (for unity), but we can't get to that point until you acknowledge the injustice," said Jecorey Arthur, a local musician and Louisville Metro councilman-elect. "To say the Kentucky Derby is a time of unity when it is the symbol of segregation in our city shows your lack of knowledge about reality."
Arthur points to two key moments in the history of the Derby and its related festivities that served to exclude Black people — specifically, a ban on Black jockeys in 1921 and a crack down on cruising in west Louisville in the early 2000s.
Unbeknownst to some, Oliver Lewis, a Black man who was born into slavery, was the first jockey to win the Kentucky Derby. And of the first 28 winning jockeys, 15 were Black.
But by the early 1900s, those same Black equestrians were forced out of the race by Jim Crow laws that enforced segregation. A Black jockey didn't get a mount in the Derby again until Marlon St. Julien rode Curule to a seventh-place finish in 2000.
"It's 2020, and if you look at the past 20 years of our inclusion or exclusion when it comes to Derby, we are still very much in the 1920s, still very much in the Jim Crow era," Arthur said.
Though Black residents didn't see themselves reflected in the race, by the late 1990s, many had created a Derby tradition of their own: cruising down West Broadway in a makeshift street party that eventually grew to attract more than 100,000 annually.
"It was much more than riding in a car and cruising," said Arthur, who grew up in the West End. "That was your opportunity as an entrepreneur to display your product, enjoy economic boom in the same way the rest of the city enjoyed it."
Within a few years, however, city officials said cruising had become out of control, with traffic jams inconveniencing residents and occasional violence, including a homicide in 2005, making the area unsafe.
In 2006, then-Mayor Jerry Abramson announced the city would crack down on cruising. And on Derby weekend that year, more than 400 police officers were dispatched to patrol Broadway and surrounding areas.
As the cruising tradition died off, some in the Black community felt their connection to the Derby and its economic impact ended with it.
"Now how much is coming to our community?" Arthur said, referencing the millions of dollars in revenue that's generated by the event each year.
In an interview on CNBC, CEO Carstanjen said Churchill Downs is "sensitive" to social and racial injustices in Louisville. And Churchill Downs President Kevin Flanery has said the events that have led to current civil unrest "deserve thoughtful discussion, continued conversation and subsequent action."
In the statement released Thursday, the company additionally said its "goal has always been that the Kentucky Derby and the way it is observed throughout the city should be inclusive of the entire Louisville community. However, we hear the calls to do more and we have challenged ourselves to do so."
While some Black residents say they'd love to participate in a discussion and see actions from Churchill Downs, they also aren't sure those promises will come to fruition.
"Louisville could make a statement. The CEO could make a statement. The Kentucky Derby Festival could make a statement," Arthur said. "I mean a systematic statement that is going to transform the way that our city operates, the way our city treats us, the the way that our city moves forward. I don't see those institutions being ready to take that leap."
Hannah Drake, a local Black writer, has lived near Churchill Downs for the last four years and said she's always felt the company should do more to support low-income neighborhoods, including those around it.
The poet has performed at the Kentucky Derby in the past, where she saw "decadence" bestowed on predominantly white guests while those outside the track were inconvenienced by road closures and security measures.
And in a public letter to Carstanjen, she challenged the CEO to "hold true to his statement."
"He has the power and influence and clearly the resources to impact not just this adjacent community but Louisville" as a whole, Drake said in an interview with The Courier Journal. "And he has the power and influence to impact people who look like him who aren't thinking about me.
"Those are tough (discussions). But that's how you change things. Ask yourself the tough questions, then ask yourself what can I do."
Savannah Eadens contributed to this report. Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/baileyl.
Protesters sit in the middle of the road in front of Churchill Downs on Aug. 25. Some called for the cancellation of the Derby.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Drake
$$$
