McGrath: Family deserves justice
Mencarini, Matt
14 July 2020
Calls for additional police officer firings and charges for the officers involved in the Breonna Taylor case have been coming from inside and outside of Louisville for months.
On Monday, U.S. Senate candidate Amy McGrath, who is running against Republican incumbent Mitch McConnell, said those decisions should come once investigations are complete.
"I think the investigation needs to come out and then a judgment needs to be made at that," she said. "You know, if the officers in this case were in the wrong, then they need to be held accountable. But the first step is we need to have an independent investigation that is transparent and swift."
McGrath spoke to reporters for several minutes Monday morning outside of Peace Presbyterian Church, which was holding its monthly food pantry. By 10 a.m., at least a dozen cars waited in line for bags of food. The line lasted until roughly 10:30 a.m.
Investigations by the Louisville Metro Police Department's Public Integrity Unit, which is being reviewed by Attorney General Daniel Cameron, and the FBI have been going on for months.
McGrath, a retired Marine fighter pilot, said she not an expert in policing, but in the aviation world, investigations take time to be done right.
"The main thing is, let's make sure it's accurate," McGrath said. "Let's make sure it's transparent, because the family of Breonna Taylor and the community, they deserve justice. They deserve to know what happened."
Taylor's death and the death of George Floyd sparked weeks of protests in Louisville and around the country over police brutality and systemic racism.
"We need to tackle police brutality and do it in a national way, in my opinion," McGrath said, referencing police body cameras and banning no-knock warrants, like the one used in the Taylor case, as starting points.
In June, the Louisville Metro Council voted to ban no-knock warrants and similar efforts are underway in the state legislature.
McGrath said the U.S. House of Representatives passed "a really good bill" to address policing issues.
"Guess what happened in the Senate?" she said. "(Senate Majority Leader) Mitch McConnell watered it down. And now it's not going anywhere.
"That's not the kind of leadership we need. What we've seen is a bipartisan cry for reform. And so leaders need to get that."
McGrath also said the pandemic is "exacerbating" the underlying racial injustice that was already a problem.
$$$
