What's next for the Breonna Taylor movement?
Gardner, Hayes
28 Sep 2020
Louisville wakes up this Monday morning fatigued, angry, sorrowful. Disappointed. Its downtown boarded up and wounded.
A city in pain.
For four months, downtown protests in the name of Breonna Taylor have continued, and they intensified following a grand jury decision that was released Wednesday not to indict any of the three officers involved in the death of Taylor.
Brett Hankinson, one of the three, received three counts of wanton endangerment for shooting into nearby apartments.
Minutes after Wednesday's decision, hundreds of protesters — who long advocated for the three officers to be arrested — took to the streets, eventually colliding with police on Bardstown Road. That night, two police officers were shot, and police have continued to face off with protesters downtown, both before and after the 9 p.m. curfew, in the days since.
Police say 47 people were arrested Friday and Saturday on charges related to the protests. On that list: Kentucky State. Rep. Attica Scott, arrested Friday night for unlawful assembly and failure to disperse.
"Tired," is how one officer described how it's felt. "It's been a long 100 days."
To be precise, 123 days as of Sunday.
Ed Stacey, the owner of ACS Computers, stood unarmed outside of his Bardstown Road store last week as a march went by. He was there, he said, to protect his business.
He says the protests have continued long enough.
"The community needs to show the city that it's time to move on," he said. "Heal. It's time to heal."
Stacey's thoughts are reflected by many.
After winning the Kentucky Derby over Labor Day weekend, horse trainer Bob Baffert was asked to share his feelings about the nationally televised protests aimed at canceling the race.
"I just feel like America is so stronger when we're united, and hopefully we get united," Baffert said. "I want to see the old America back."
And yet, that's the exact opposite of what protesters have pushed against and have tried to make clear for the past four months. They do not want business as usual, they do not want the status quo.
They do not want the old America back.
What's become clear after more than 17 weeks of marching through the streets of Louisville: The protesters are not quite ready to heal; they want to push forward.
So, they continue to take to the streets, in part propelled by anger following the grand jury's decision.
But they also are demanding transparency from Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, are seeking change to the city's leadership and are working to "fight the injustices that rear their head and are manifested all across the city, this state, this nation," as Louisville minister and activist Adrian Baker put it.
Wednesday's decision was more of an inflection point than it was a conclusion.
"I don't think this chapter," Baker said, "is closed in any way."
***
Sunday marked the 123rd straight day of protests in Louisville, but to some, like protester Chris Fox, it was more accurately Day 5. For 118 days, protesters chanted with a clear focus — for the three officers to be arrested and charged in Taylor's death.
But on Wednesday, the day of the decision, the clock essentially restarted.
Hundreds gathered that day at Jefferson Square Park, around a loudspeaker which announced the grand jury's decision. When it became clear none of the three officers were being charged directly for their role in Taylor's death, there was confusion, ire, and dejection.
Some shouted; others cried.
The ensuing marches were ones of anger and sorrow. Chanters still sang out for the cops to be arrested and for justice to be served, but the motivations of protesters have also adapted. For many, they are applying intense, very vocal pressure on Cameron, who has a litany of questions left to answer.
Sadiqa Reynolds, president and CEO of the Louisville Urban League, said protesters don't feel like they've received the truth, and that without truth, there is no justice.
"What I want people to understand is that the Black community has been patiently, quietly, asking, kneeling, negotiating justice for years," she said.
"Every video that we see of police killing somebody, every story that we hear, regardless of what community we live in, we are waiting with bated breath that this will be the one that's different," she said. "You keep on, and then, this happens, so now you have this anger, this frustration, this resentment. Like you don't even think enough of me to answer my questions?"
Beyond Cameron, there is also pressure on Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer. "What we need to do? Fire the mayor," is the punch line of a chant that has rang out for weeks.
Before the grand jury's decision, Tamika Mallory of the Until Freedom protest group said if the officers were not indicted, they should be fired "on the spot" by Fischer.
Local leader Chris Wells agreed. "The cops need to be fired. Period," he said of what's next for the Breonna Taylor movement.
There was a voter registration drive at the park on Friday, which many protesters agree is a focus.
"The only way you can make changes is to get out there and vote," Wells said.
Ahead of a massive march on Saturday, minister and protester Stachelle Bussey led a call-and-response that borrows a phrase Breonna Taylor used to say: "Apply pressure," Bussey called out; "Pressure applied," came the response.
For 118 days, that pressure most specifically related to charges against the three officers, but also a variety of other issues: gentrification, police reform, affordable housing, and so on. Pressure on those fronts continues as the days mount up, whether it's Day 123 or Day 5.
As protester Christina Johnson, a local educator, said: "I would like to first see the Black members of Louisville treated as equal as the white members of Louisville."
***
The Achilles tendon is the largest and strongest tendon in the human body. It allows for the foot to move up and down, essential for moving forward. But it's also very fragile, and damage to it takes time to heal.
When it gets hurt, it's a complicated and painful recovery process.
Reynolds, the Louisville Urban League CEO and president, ruptured her Achilles last week. She spoke to a crowd of protesters on Wednesday, fighting tears of emotion, and then, on Friday at 7 a.m., had surgery.
Less than 12 hours post-operation, she stood on Market Street with a walker, supporting protesters as they marched by her.
Reynolds has highlighted all that the protests have accomplished, from banning no-knock warrants to a review of LMPD to reform around search warrants. Still, she said, it's not yet time for Louisville to heal. Instead, she wants transparency from Cameron.
Over the past week, Reynolds said she's felt profound sadness, disappointment, betrayal, anger, hurt, rage, disgust, pain, but also love and some pride.
"You know how hard it is to sit down and be still when you're me, and you know your city is in so much pain? I'm physically in pain, but I know mine will end," she said.
"I don't know what's going to happen here."
$$$
