Kosair Charities may take action against former chairman
02 Aug 2020
The board of Kosair Charities is deciding what it will do with board member Jerry Ward after he took to social media on Saturday and told someone that they should "Move to Africa."
It's not the first time Ward has caused problems for himself and the charity by posting inflammatory things on social media.
He was forced to resign as chairman of the Kosair board in 2018 after he posted a meme comparing students who survived the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, to the Hitler Youth.
But he was allowed to stay on the board of the charity, which has for 97 years done a lot of good for children in the region who needed medical care.
The most recent problem started Saturday when Mayor Greg Fischer was holding a Facebook Live discussion about the coronavirus and several people began commenting in the accompanying chat about the Black Lives Matter movement and Breonna Taylor, who was shot to death in March by Louisville Metro Police officers trying to serve a search warrant on her home.
Three minutes in, one woman posted a short video of a protester shouting "Say her name" into a bullhorn and the crowd responding, "Breonna Taylor."
Another woman posted "Resign," an apparent message for Fischer.
That's when Ward piped up, according to a screen shot of the exchange.
"Move to Africa," he wrote.
Ward said in an email that his comment was directed at Fischer, who he said has failed to bring the community together during the protests.
"Again, my disappointment is solely with the Mayor, who I supported financially and voted for in the past," he wrote.
Ward said he immediately deleted the post so no one would misunderstand his message.
But before he deleted it, someone took a photo of it, sent it to Kosair Charity officials and alerted me to the emerging controversy.
Keith Inman, the president of Kosair Charities, had already been laying the groundwork for dealing with Ward when reached by phone.
"Today, during Mayor Fischer's briefing, it was brought to my attention that there was an inexcusable and unacceptable comment made by a member of the Kosair Charities board," he said in a prepared statement.
"To the mayor and every individual witness to this intolerable comment and behavior, both myself as Kosair Charities president, as well as our Kosair Charities Chairman (H.I. Stroth), apologize. We vow to take every possible action at this difficult time. While the post has been deleted, there are more immediate actions to take," he said.
The charity's executive committee met later Saturday to deal with the situation involving Ward, but did not come to a resolution.
There's a real question as to whether Ward Will be able to stay on the board, however.
According to Kosair Charities' website, one of the five values the charity lists is "inclusion." Nothing seems quite as exclusionary as telling someone in a discussion involving race that they aren't wanted here and that they should "Move to Africa."
In another email, Ward said he suggested Fischer move to Africa simply because he had been to Africa and it was the first thing that came to mind when he thought of a faraway place.
If Ward is tossed off the board, Kosair may want to consider replacing him with an African American.
All 22 members of Kosair's board listed on the charity's website are white men and all 22 members of its executive staff appear to be white as well. One member of the staff does appear to be Latino.
Again, Kosair has done tremendous work caring for children for nearly 100 years, but having a board that isn't integrated in this day and age is outrageous and could be part of the problem.
Inman said Kosair's articles of incorporation requires board members to be Kosair Shriners.
"I do not think there are any African American members of Kosair Shrine," said Inman, who noted that Kosair does have a community advisory board that is more diverse. "We have had preliminary discussions on how to address (this), but have work to do."
If inclusion really is a value, this is Kosair Charities' chance to prove it now.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Former Kosair Charities Chairman Jerry Ward is again under fire for
his social media posts.
$$$
