Portraits of a Protest
Gardner, Hayes
28 June 2020
"It's a good cause, and it's something that I'm willing to be out here for, something that I'm willing to get arrested for again, something that I'm willing to die for. And I say that smiling."
Carmen Jones
23-year old Black woman who used to skip recess in the second and third grade, sitting on the computer in her classroom and reading about Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, Assata Shakur and the Black Panthers
Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was killed by Louisville police officers in her home on March 13, and since May 28 protesters in Louisville have marched in her honor.
The tireless protesters populate Jefferson Square Park, their de facto downtown headquarters, each day and march each night in search of justice for Taylor and changes to a system they believe is beyond unfair.
For more than a month, the collection of like-minded, dissimilar folks has been jigsawed together by their propensity to assemble each night in Taylor's name. Here are a few of their stories.
A crowd of about 150 protesters entered its third marched mile on Tuesday evening just as the sun was setting in the Highlands. There were revelers at Baxter's 942 Bar and Grill, and there were drinkers and diners at O'Shea's Irish Pub, and there was 12-year-old Keshawn Johnson, sporting an Engelhard Elementary youth baseball T-shirt over his black skin and shouting for the patrons of each establishment to chant with the crescendoing protest. "Black Lives Matter!" Keshawn yelled on Baxter Avenue, just as he had for that entire evening and day and month.
The patrons yelled with him.
Keshawn has been regularly brought to the protests by his grandmother, Anna Harrison, who began volunteering with the Kentucky Alliance a month ago after swinging by the protests for just one day. She wanted Keshawn to witness history.
But he hasn't merely witnessed. He's demanded the megaphone, literally and figuratively, in what has become a nonstop youth movement. He created a 12-line poem — never writing it down, simply crafting it in his head and memorizing it — which he recited aloud to a crowd of protesters earlier this month.
"We will always be looked at different 'cause we're Black/ 'Cause they think we're either shooting, killing, or selling crack," he began.
Keshawn plays basketball, baseball and football, is a junior pastor at his church and a straight-A student at school, where he recently completed the seventh grade. He's been coming to Jefferson Square Park since June 2.
"I gotta get my voice heard," he said. "If we're the future, we gotta do something now."
His participation has had a special impact on Harrison who, in her 68 years in Louisville, had never seen a protest before. Now, she watches her young grandson lead the charge.
"I get choked up sometimes," Harrison said.
The duo arrives at noon each day and leaves around 7 p.m., and Keshawn sometimes doesn't want to depart when the time strikes. "Do we have to go?" he asked Harrison one day as he led a group of adults in yet another rendition of, "No Justice, No Peace, Prosecute the Police."
She lets him march in the evening protests on occasion, though, like on Tuesday, and throughout the day and night, he's constantly active. It's an attitude reflected in the final couplet of his poem.
"We can't just sit on the couch and pout/ It's about time that we show the world what we're about."
Carmen Jones used to skip recess in the second and third grade, sitting on the computer in her classroom and reading about Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, Assata Shakur and the Black Panthers.
"I've always had this big love for my people and big love for Black people," said Jones, a 23-year old Black woman who says of herself with a smile: "I'm tiny, but I'm mighty."
Jones has lived in five different states in her life — including attending four different high schools — and she lived just across the river from Ferguson, Missouri, where Mike Brown was killed. She can still remember where she was, and how she cried, when she heard about his death.
Breonna Taylor's death during a Louisville police raid was even closer.
"When Breonna Taylor died, I was outraged. I wanted to start that night," she said.
Jones was on a date on May 28, the night Louisville became a sudden epicenter of protests across the country, and she detoured her date downtown.
"We parked and we finally found the action, and I looked at him, and I'm like, 'You don't know me, but you're about to get to know me,'" she said.
Jones, an aspiring attorney, is nothing if not passionate about systemic change — she calls the courthouse and Metro Hall the "big slave buildings" — and she's continued to protest with a purpose: to seek more than simply prosecution of the officers involved in the raid that killed Taylor.
"Revolutions are won with blood, they are won with sweat, they are won with tears, and they are won with a couple of arrests," she said. "You have to be aggressive in a revolution, otherwise we're going to get 50 more years of complacency laws."
She was arrested by a flurry of police officers on June 15 and has the scrapes to prove it. She also met with the mayor that week to discuss fundamental changes to the city.
Part-peaceful protester and part-radical, Jones values the importance of peace, she said, but she's also fatigued from being ignored. To her, the status quo is unacceptable. And while she doesn't condone rioting or looting or violence, she can't say she doesn't understand the frustrations that have fueled the protests.
"It's a good cause, and it's something that I'm willing to be out here for, something that I'm willing to get arrested for again, something that I'm willing to die for," she said. "And I say that smiling."
Ronnie Hogan, has looked it up, and he believes he's the first person to say it. Either way, he came up with it himself, and he knows it embodies who he is and what he's been up to for the past month.
"I'm not a martyr," he said. "I'm just a soldier."
In many ways, Hogan's life has been a battle. He's battled drug addiction, homelessness, cancer and an HIV-positive diagnosis. He has been in a wheelchair for the past six years. He's missing his left leg.
Hogan is a 52-year-old white man and attended each night of the protests for the first three weeks. He's been arrested, tear-gassed, and has spoken to police and protesters alike through a megaphone. He's known by other protesters for his kind demeanor and the sign that's perpetually stationed behind him on his chair: "Stand for something, or you'll fall for anything."
Hogan is a fixture at Jefferson Square Park and marches, and the only thing that has stalled him from protesting of late is the recent malfunctioning of his wheelchair.
"Trust me, as soon as it's fixed, you know where I'll be," he said.
Hogan has fought addiction for 30 years, he said, but feels he has turned a corner in the past year. He fought homelessness and the battles that come with it, and he's fought a slew of challenging health issues.
Still, the death of Breonna Taylor gave him the energy to take to the streets for more than 20 straight days. He's motivated by the injustices he sees in police brutality, which are personal to him, in a way. As a gay man, he wonders how he would feel if the police were mistreating homosexuals, and it only spurs him further to protest.
At the daily marches, he's found a community that has grown together, and he's enjoyed hearing each individual's story. Few have a story like Hogan, who reports for duty — when he's able — each day.
"I believe God's got a purpose for me. I don't know what it is," he said. "Maybe it's this Breonna Taylor thing, maybe I can make a difference in some way, somewhere."
Gwendolyn Atkinson-Sample attended the protests early on, during the first week, and she was pleased to see fervent action. But she felt like there was something missing, and so she took to Facebook Live to express her concerns.
"I poured out my soul," she said.
The 49-year old Black woman was pleased with the peaceful protests but wanted more tangible change. Something more direct.
"We can come down here and protest every day, all day, because it is our right, and then have the police set up and push our buttons and stuff and call us to get all angry and upset, but what else can we do?" she said. "So I said, 'Well it starts with voting.'"
A close friend of many years, Loretta Grimes, reached out to Atkinson-Sample after watching her Facebook Live, and a group of about six began to form and generate ideas for a collaborative action plan.
They formed the Voters Coalition of Louisville and have spent the past few weeks stationed under a tent at Jefferson Square Park and other locations, assisting voters in receiving absentee ballots for this past week's primary and helping to register voters for the 2020 general election.
"There are just too many unnecessary killings that have been happening, and racism is on the rise, and it's imperative and essential that we are out here," said Atkinson-Sample, who works in education, "to just educate people to vote."
The group estimates they've served 200 voters.
Atkinson-Sample still participates in protests. She stood between police and protesters during a tense scene on June 15 and participated this week as a group of students marched a casket, emblazoned with names of victims of police brutality, to the Roots 101 African-American Museum. But her focus remains on voting.
"Where do we start?" she said of solving problems. "Voting is where we start."
Logan Cleaver rarely marches without a raised fist.
During protests, many often lift a clenched fist, a common symbol of solidarity and support for human rights movements, particularly for Black people. But no one more so than Cleaver, who seems to have his arm perpetually elevated to the sky as he walks, chants and protests.
And although he's spent the bulk of the past month raising his arm, as of last year he'd never attended a protest. He'd never been involved in a political campaign, or signed a petition.
Police violence is an issue that has long heated him, but he didn't take action until recently, when everything — including America's history of police brutality and Breonna Taylor's death specifically — eddied inside him as it reached what he and others have independently described as a "boiling point."
He'd never marched before, but he's now only missed a few days since he began on May 30.
"The reason I'm here is because every time I see a video of one of my people dying to police brutality, it makes me sick. I tear up," said Cleaver, a 22-year old African-American man. "This is our fight."
Cleaver is not affiliated with any of the groups that have helped to organize the protests, but he is representative of many of the protesters who come out each day: he's simply a civilian, and he's concerned.
He's marched all over the city, and he's also been struck by a rubber bullet and was "lit up," as he put it, by pepper bullets from police during a fray June 18 as he ran around Jefferson Square Park, scrambling amid the chaos for order with his fellow protesters.
Many of the regular protesters, strangers only a month ago, have become close from marching together for so long. For Cleaver, that's powerful.
"It's amazing," he said. "It's heartwarming to see that, to see people of all walks of life standing together."
Montez Jones is known by many people for many things. He's known for his hip-hop song "Bow," he's known for promoting parties, and he's known for befriending anyone and everyone. He is not, however, known as an organizer, nor as an activist, and yet his animated, larger-than-life personality has become the battery behind the daily marches protesting Taylor's death.
He's a "public figure," as he puts it, and after a friend encouraged him on May 28 to go to the protests and stream on Facebook Live, his video accumulated nearly 600,000 viewers as the nation took a front-row seat to the streets of Louisville. He hasn't stopped marching or streaming videos since, trading in his typical duties as a club hype man to become a protester extraordinaire.
Jones arrives at Jefferson Square park at 4 p.m. each day and is in motion for the next several hours: dancing, yelling, talking, laughing, and, most critically, marching.
Several protesters cite him as a reason they come to the marches, and Anna Harrison said that her grandson Keshawn looks up to Jones.
"When he sees him, he lights up like a Christmas tree," she said.
If someone wants to get a group of people to listen — say, to march down a certain street — they holler for Jones to lead the way, and people follow. He leads dance circles, laughs with his whole body, and exudes enthusiasm throughout the marches, which often last hours.
His voice never tires, he said, and cough drops serve as a remedy for all the shouting.
"As long as I keep doing that," he said of being loud, "the energy flows."
He can't go five minutes without someone approaching him to chat, and his expansive network has fringe benefits, too. When a recent march blocked traffic and the driver of a vehicle became angry with the protest, Jones approached the man — who happened to be an old acquaintance — and diffused the situation.
Jones is unremitting in his daily marching. Even on Monday, one of the smallest protests since they began, he marched down Broadway with about 50 others as they endured the rain.
Although not an activist, he said he marches for victims of police brutality, both named and unnamed.
"David McAtee, Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, anybody," said Jones, 36. "I got people that have lost their lives to police injustice, but nobody knows about."
Issues like this and others — poverty, debt, violent civilian-on-civilian crime, mental illness — have long been on the mind of the promoter turned protester, but he never raised his voice about it until now.
"I didn't know it would get this big," he said.
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"It's a good cause, and it's something that I'm willing to be out here for, something that I'm willing to get arrested for again, something that I'm willing to die for. And I say that smiling."
Carmen Jones
23-year old Black woman who used to skip recess in the second and third grade, sitting on the computer in her classroom and reading about Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, Assata Shakur and the Black Panthers
Montez Jones stands in front of a wall of calls for justice and defunding the police in Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville on Sunday.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Logan Cleaver holds up a fist during chants in Jefferson Square Park before a peaceful march through downtown Louisville on June 17 led by youths.
$$$
