AG Daniel Cameron: Still no timeline on the Breonna Taylor investigation
Sonka, Joe; Costello, Darcy
14 July 2020
FRANKFORT — Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron said Monday he still has no timeline for when his office will conclude its investigation into the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor.
But, his investigators have now received all requested information from the Louisville Metro Police Department, he confirmed.
The attorney general was asked by the Jefferson County commonwealth's attorney in May to serve as the special prosecutor in the case of Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency room technician who was fatally shot by Louisville police serving a no-knock warrant at her apartment just before 1 a.m. March 13.
Taylor's death has sparked widespread outrage and protests in Louisville and across the country, as Cameron's office tries to determine whether it will charge any of the three officers who fired their weapons that night.
As he did at his June 18 news conference, Cameron said Monday that he has no timeline on when his investigation will be complete, though he did express confidence that Louisville police have turned over all requested information related to Taylor's fatal shooting.
"Our team is working diligently on this," Cameron said. "I know it's not been as quick as anyone would have liked, but know and trust that we are doing our best to complete this investigation in a timely manner."
Sam Aguiar, an attorney for Taylor's family, said Monday that he hoped the reason for the delay is because Cameron's office is "working hard to put back together anything that was lost as a result of an LMPD cover-up."
He said it's hard to impose a steadfast deadline and that he was going to "cross his fingers" that officials were working to uncover the truth.
"My priority is them getting it right, and getting criminal charges imposed on everyone responsible, rather than moving forward too quickly," Aguiar said.
Cameron also defended Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's recent decision to withhold documents from the Louisville Metro Council related to the Taylor investigation.
"I think the mayor's assessment is correct," Cameron said. "I think if you look at any investigation, in order not to compromise that investigation, it's better that information stay internal so that can be conducted in a fair and uncompromised manner."
Aguiar said there should be information in the investigative file that won't compromise the investigations and those records should be released.
If, for example, there is body camera footage of any incident that would be of public interest, it should be released, he said, adding that the department has "flaunted" its transparency body camera policy for years.
The three officers who fired their weapons, killing Taylor, were not required to wear body cameras.
"It's their burden under the law to deny requests with specificity and give the basis for the denial, and it's their obligation to release anything that's not going to compromise the investigation," Aguiar said. "There are certain things that just aren't."
Reporter Darcy Costello contributed to this report. Reach reporter Joe Sonka at jsonka@courierjournal.com or 502-582-4472 and follow him on Twitter at @joesonka. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courierjournal.com/subscribe.
$$$
