About 27 LMPD officers 'called in sick' Wednesday
Tobin, Ben; Kachmar, Kala
02 July 2020
For the second day in a row, a "number" of Louisville Metro Police officers have called out sick, including 27 Wednesday, officials said.
LMPD hasn't said whether it believes officers have been planning for mass absenteeism, which is prohibited in their contract, or if they're sick. Spokeswoman Jessie Halladay the number of officers who called out is higher than a typical day.
"We are not going to say anything further or try to speculate on the claims of illness," she said.
On Monday, River City Fraternal Order of Police President Ryan Nichols posted on Facebook that he was "aware" of a "push" for officers to call out sick in response to recent decisions by city officials and upper command staff. He asked that they not.
The FOP doesn't condone staged sickouts, Nichols told The Courier Journal on Wednesday. Officers' contracts prohibit "any work stoppage, mass absenteeism, slowdown, mass resignation, strike or any type of concerted activity."
"If they do happen to be sick, it's because we're in the state of a pandemic, or they've been working so long and in arduous conditions that their immune systems are worn down," Nichols said.
The officers who called to stay home Wednesday were from the city's Fourth, Fifth and Sixth divisions, and the calls came in as of 7:30 a.m., LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington said in a news release. Officers from other divisions were reallocated for the day to assist other divisions.
On Tuesday, a "number" of officers from the city's Third Division, which includes Audubon, Pleasure Ridge Park and Valley Station, also called out.
Officers have said they're being abused, overworked and underappreciated in responding to protests in Louisville in response to the deaths of Breonna Taylor, David McAtee and Tyler Gerth. Protests have been a nightly occurrence in Louisville for more than a month.
Officers are working in extremely dangerous conditions, Nichols said.
"Men and women of LMPD are working their butts off to do a fantastic job of trying to provide public safety to this city," Nichols said Wednesday. "With the lawlessness being allowed to continue with no end in sight, I can completely understand the frustration level they're facing."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said Wednesday morning the frustration from protesters and police officers is being felt all over the country.
"At the end of the day, a police officer signs up to serve and protect the community," Fischer said. "And we need them in good times, bad times, easy times and hard times."
He said police leaders are "talking" to those "who feel like not showing up for work is a good thing."
He said that he doesn't want to minimize the difficulties or challenges officers are facing, but that they need to come to the table and help the city's leaders move forward rather than going to their own "corner."
Nichols said one of the biggest difficulties for officers is inconsistent leadership.
"The decision changes almost daily on what our plan is or what we're going to do. What do you want us to do? What's the end game? What course of action will get us to the goal, and what is the goal?" Nichols said.
"There's no end in sight."
And morale is low, he added. Officers are leaving for retirement and jobs with better pay and benefits, Nichols said.
Those who called out of work Wednesday represent less than 3% of LMPD's roughly 1,100 sworn officers. If so few calling out sick can cause disruption, there are major staffing issues, Nichols said.
The Courier Journal reported Monday that the department has spent $3 million in overtime in response to nightly protests in the city.
Dozens of Louisville police officers walked out on Fischer in early June to demonstrate their frustration.
$$$
