More of your voices will be heard
21 June 2020
Over the past three weeks, I've thought often about ways to be more relevant and more revelatory to more readers. More than once, I've reflected on these words from Barry Bingham Sr., former editor and publisher of The Courier Journal: "A newspaper cannot hope to please all readers. What it must do is to strive tirelessly to merit the respect of fair-minded people. It must accept legitimate criticism, in good grace, as the best tonic a newspaper can take for its health."
A national reckoning centered around systemic racism and police-community relations is unfolding in America and on the streets of Louisville. Because of that, there is a need for honest, transparent conversations about the issues that are dividing our communities across Kentucky and Southern Indiana. The Courier Journal recognizes its role in this historic moment in our city, our commonwealth and our country.
Since my arrival two years ago, Engagement Editor Veda Morgan and I have positioned the Opinion and Sunday Forum sections of the state's largest newspaper and digital news site to be a gathering spot of meaningful, thoughtful dialogue. We see it as assembly of disparate views and observations about the matters of the day with contributions from conservatives, progressives and everyone in between.
In the past two years, we have reinvented this section to seek and publish more opinion columns — known in our business as "op-ed pieces" — from newsmakers, influencers and engaged citizens from around Kentucky. We also reassembled in 2019 an editorial board that had been dismantled a few years ago, and we're sharing when appropriate our institutional opinions on key issues that confront us as residents, taxpayers and voters.
And along the way, I hope we've made clear that your voice is more important than our voice.
Our efforts seem to be striking a chord with you. Our Opinion section on courierjournal.com has enjoyed a triple-digit spike in digital traffic from 2018, and some of the most-shared stories we post on The Courier Journal's Facebook page come from contributors and freelance columnists.
And often, we struggle to find enough ink-on-paper space to publish the quantity of thought-provoking columns and letters-to-the-editor flooding our electronic in-boxes. We are addressing that.
We are making four significant moves related to our Opinion and Forum efforts, effective today. That's because now — arguably more than ever because of a reawakening of thoughtful talk and action on race relations and a global health crisis — there must be a greater range of commentary and contemplation. We are:
Expanding this Sunday Forum section by two pages for at least the next three months to better reflect more of your views, your opinions and your thoughts. We also will be reexamining our community engagement efforts and opportunities on courierjournal.com.
Inviting and then publishing an even deeper cross-section of views from folks you may not routinely hear from or know about, but are on the front lines of equality and police reform.
Forming a community advisory board of Louisville-area and statewide individuals who can share ideas, experiences and opinions about key issues — especially those focused on race relations and the policies and tactics of the Louisville Metro Police Department — with our editorial board. Contact me if you want to be part of this group.
Publishing in this section more in-depth stories from our staff reporters that explore important aspects of the Breonna Taylor shooting, the ensuing protests and the voices of those who have taken to Louisville's neighborhoods demanding justice, reform and a deeper understanding of systemic racism.
I also ask for your thoughts about our coverage — on our Opinion pages, in our news columns and at courierjournal.com. Please, tell me how we're doing. Share your ideas on how we can play an even more prominent part of a community-wide conversation about the issues before our city. Over the past three weeks, I've thought often about ways to be more relevant and more revelatory to more readers.
More than once, I've reflected on these words from Barry Bingham Sr., former editor and publisher of The Courier Journal: "A newspaper cannot hope to please all readers. What it must do is to strive tirelessly to merit the respect of fair-minded people. It must accept legitimate criticism, in good grace, as the best tonic a newspaper can take for its health."
It's advice that applies to far, far more people and institutions right now than just an the editor of the city's daily newspaper and largest digital news site.
Looking forward to your thoughts. Share them with me at rgreen@courierjournal.com.
Thanks, as always, for reading.
Over the past three weeks, I've thought often about ways to be more relevant and more revelatory to more readers. More than once, I've reflected on these words from Barry Bingham Sr., former editor and publisher of The Courier Journal: "A newspaper cannot hope to please all readers. What it must do is to strive tirelessly to merit the respect of fair-minded people. It must accept legitimate criticism, in good grace, as the best tonic a newspaper can take for its health."
Richard A. Green
Editor
$$$
