JCPS racial equity plan calls for Black Student Unions
Kobin, Billy
06 Aug 2020
Jefferson County Public Schools students are starting their new school year at home, but several racial equity initiatives from the district seek to ensure that difficult conversations around current events will continue outside school walls.
"Centering the reality of happenings in Louisville in the classroom" is part of the school district's efforts to discuss the "historic racism that is exacerbated in virtual learning," according to a JCPS presentation shared Tuesday during a board meeting.
One key recommendation from the district's racial equity plan for the 2020-21 academic year is to have Black Student Unions form at all middle and high schools.
The Brown School, along with Manual, Male and Central high schools, are among the places where students have started "BSUs" in the last few years.
A district spokesperson did not immediately know how many JCPS campuses currently have BSUs.
Black students at universities across the nation have also formed such unions and associations since the civil rights movement in the 1960s.
But this year, as JCPS Chief Equity Officer John Marshall said during a Tuesday board meeting, "there are some critical things that have happened with the lynchings of Breonna Taylor and many others throughout the country."
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, died in March after Louisville police officers fatally shot her while serving a drug-related warrant at her apartment.
Her death, along with the killings of George Floyd and other Black Americans at the hands of police, sparked protests that have not stopped in Louisville and other cities.
Forming Black Student Unions at all JCPS middle and high schools will help Louisville's young adults discuss the ongoing issues and struggles related to race and inequality.
"This is not the end all, be all," Marshall told JCPS board members during Tuesday's meeting, held via teleconference. "But this is a safe place for Black students to convene, congregate and discuss their own experiences and understandings, all the while understanding how they connect with a school and do things inside of their school that they feel need to be addressed."
JCPS will start its school year on Aug. 25 with a continuation of nontraditional instruction, or NTI, which it was forced to implement in March when COVID-19 cases hit Kentucky.
But as district officials and board members discussed Tuesday, the "NTI 2.0" plan that will be in place for at least the first six weeks of the fall semester will include numerous changes and improvements over the spring model.
Keeping the ongoing pandemic and protests over racism in mind, JCPS is implementing not only the Black Student Union recommendation but several other racial equity goals.
For example, 20 teachers will be selected to attend a "Black Experience Institute," according to Marshall.
The teachers will "be a part of designing a framework that really unpacks and addresses the whole story of the Black experience in America," Marshall said.
That group will then take what it designs and give it to other teachers and principals, "so they can use that as they design curriculum" that can help teach about and lead to "racial justice," Marshall added.
Another initiative is to have every JCPS staff member and administrator create racial equity goals that will keep leaders accountable in their efforts, Marshall said.
Finally, Marshall touched on how classes — during both the remote learning period and whenever students and teachers may return to in-person instruction — will feature "courageous conversations on race."
Marshall and his team have already been talking with principals and superintendents about "these conversations that we must have and not shy away from."
Many JCPS students have visited Jefferson Square Park to attend protests related to Taylor's death and police brutality over the past few months, and they've "witnessed a lot of things that have happened in America," Marshall said.
"We know that those conversations are going to happen in the classroom, virtually or face to face," he continued. "So we're giving training and expectations on not shying away from that conversation addressing race and racism inside of our schools and inside of our system.
"We are working on a curriculum that's even more engaging and more honest about Black experiences and other marginalized, muted and mistreated groups. So it can be a learning opportunity and a teachable moment."
JCPS Superintendent Marty Pollio echoed Marshall's points, stating that along with the pandemic, "there's clearly been a lot of unrest in our community around racial equity issues."
"Clearly, we want to be there for our students," Pollio said Wednesday. "We want to make this a part of our curriculum. ... We will continue to move forward with that racial equity plan to eliminate gaps and disproportionality. This is extremely important.
"We've got a long way to go to eliminate those gaps," Pollio added. "But this is one piece of it, and we're going to continue to do that work."
As school resumes, Marshall said those discussions surrounding racism and inequity are something that students will want to start "on the first day."
Have more thoughts on the racial equity plan? Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Central is among the JCPS high schools where students have started a Black Student Union.
provided
Central BSU visits Birmingham Civil Rights Park.
$$$
