Woman is committed to a life of activism
26 July 2020
"We want them fired. ... You can't heal if you don't see justice."
Shameka Parrish-
Wright
Shameka Parrish-Wright was a young mother of three, living in a housing project in Cincinnati, when she tried out for the city's police force.
A cousin had recently been hired by the department. And Parrish-Wright, always eager to accept a challenge, figured she might as well see if she'd like the job, too.
She took a written test and passed. But during an obstacle course, a muscle in Parrish-Wright's leg cramped.
She finished six seconds shy of a qualifying time.
A different outcome could have had Parrish-Wright in uniform now, opposite protesters who are demanding an end to police brutality in cities nationwide.
Instead, she fell in love with grassroots organizing and has dedicated herself to fighting systemic racism from the outside.
"I could have had a whole different life," Parrish-Wright said recently from downtown Louisville's Jefferson Square Park, where protesters have met for more than 50 straight days. "But I started doing community organizing around gentrification in Cincinnati, and then I just went from there."
Parrish-Wright moved to Louisville at 25 to start her own social justice organization, but she instead became connected to the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, where she now serves as a co-chair.
She found a mentor in civil rights activist Anne Braden, who helped launch the alliance in the late 1970s. And though working with the organization kept her poor, Parrish-Wright said she's never been drawn to activism for the money or acclaim.
She just loves the feeling that comes with making a change.
"That's the thing about community organizing and civil rights work, you're doing things that benefit people, whether they know it or not," she said.
Parrish-Wright now owns a consulting company and works as a site manager for the national Bail Project, which uses donations to free people from jail.
But for the past two months, most of her time has been spent at Jefferson Square Park, where she and other members of the Kentucky Alliance have been supporting the ongoing protests — giving out free food and leading educational sessions on healing and safety.
The members don't lead the nightly marches that continue to draw dozens. But they help guide new activists whose emotions often run high, who are outraged by the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor and who aren't afraid of putting themselves in jeopardy to demand justice on Taylor's behalf.
"If we're not out there with them, they're just out there," Parrish-Wright said.
"All they have is their bodies to put on the line. People don't understand that. They're like, 'Why are they so angry? Why are they in the streets? Why are they doing this?' Because (they) don't have nothing else."
Parrish-Wright understands how the young protesters feel. She's seen enough gun violence to last a lifetime — with four of her boyfriends dying from gunfire in her youth.
She can't stand to see any more senseless deaths. And she's calling on Louisville officials to do the right thing by punishing the officers who shot and killed Taylor.
"Our community agrees we don't care if they're going to come back and sue," Parrish-Wright said. "We want them fired. If they're not fired, arrested and prosecuted, then we feel like we're not being listened to at all. That's why people are here, we feel like they're not listening to us.
"You can't heal if you don't see ... justice."
"We want them fired. ... You can't heal if you don't see justice."
Shameka Parrish-
Wright
Shameka Parrish-Wright works as a manager for the national Bail Project. At Jefferson Square Park, she's joined protests.
$$$
