'Left to pick up the pieces'
Schneider, Grace
04 June 2020
The wave of violence, vandalism and looting unrelated to the peaceful protests that have flooded downtown Louisville's streets since Thursday hurt a wide array of businesses — hotels, restaurants, chain sporting good stores, small boutiques and groceries.
And the mayhem has led many merchants to clear their stock, board their windows and barricade their doors against more trouble.
Neither business leaders nor city officials have yet to tabulate estimates of damage after nights of protests related to the death of 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot during a March 13 police raid at her apartment.
Business leaders, certainly upset about the millions of dollars in losses, say the violent protests signal a need for a more inclusive and diverse economy throughout Louisville.
After looters and vandals hit dozens of downtown businesses late last Friday night and early Saturday morning, another wave hit Monday night into early Tuesday on West Broadway, New Cut Road and Outer Loop after law enforcement officers fatally shot David McAtee, a well-known barbecue stand owner who they say fired first.
Vandals smashed plate-glass windows, hammered glass display cabinets inside stores and made off with everything from fine wines at the upscale Eddie Merlot's to potato chips from a corner supermarket at Third and Broadway. They spray-painted "BLM" — Black Lives Matter — and anti-police messages on downtown buildings.
A coin shop, restaurants, a Subway, a watch repair, CVS pharmacy, Heine Brothers' Coffee, Stewart's Pawn Shop and several hotels were hit. That included the 600-room Omni Louisville Hotel, where several street-level windows were broken, especially around Falls City Market on Liberty Street.
Inside the hotel complex, looters busted into a liquor store, smashed bottles of bourbon, vodka and wine and carted some off, spokeswoman Kerri Richardson said.
Because of the damage, the hotel likely will need to delay its expected July reopening "even longer" after closing during the coronavirus pandemic, she said.
The epicenter of the destruction through Monday involved the blocks bounded by Market Street and Broadway between Sixth and Second streets. But other areas, such as a Norton Healthcare facility and a tire store along East Broadway, as well as a Dixie Highway sporting goods store, also sustained smashed windows, broken equipment and thefts.
Late Monday night and early Tuesday destruction spread to southern Louisville, where looters hit a Walgreens at New Cut Road and Palatka Road, as well as the Walmart Supercenter, Verizon and GameStop on Outer Loop.
In a statement, Walmart officials said "we're monitoring this situation closely as it develops and will continue closing stores in select markets as a safety precaution for our customers and associates. Several locations have been impacted, and we will work to assess the damage and plan to reopen as soon as possible."
The Kroger at 28th Street and Broadway was closed after looters busted into a side door overnight Monday. Thieves also broke into nearby Chase bank ATM where video from mayhem showed several making off with handfuls of cash.
The destruction has left business owners wondering what's next.
"Nobody wants to be in a city with graffiti and boarded-up windows. That's what we've got now," said Amar Kahedy, who owns the Weissinger-Gaulbert and the Fincastle, apartment and office buildings with ground level retail shops near Third and Broadway. He also owns The Gramercy, a wedding and events venue nearby.
Several property owners and proprietors expressed frustration with Louisville Metro Police's handling of the growing threat as rioters went on a spree, most of it starting late Friday night.
LMPD arrested 136 people in a stretch between May 28 and Monday at 8 p.m., which included some for looting. Most were charged with unlawful assembly and curfew violations, spokesman Dwight Mitchell said.
Gant Hill, a commercial real estate broker who manages Kahedy's three large buildings, which house more than 100 tenants, said he rushed to the scene in the wee hours of Saturday morning.
He said demonstrators elbowed past him as he and maintenance staff swept up glass — to grab a handful of potato chip bags from the bodega. One guy brazenly walked up and smashed more glass in doors and windows with a machete-looking tool, Hill said.
He said that he didn't feel safe confronting anyone and that there were few police in the area.
"I think (Louisville police) have been too quiet," Hill said. "They've not been proactive. They've been reactive. More should have been done before Friday."
At The Watch Shop on Broadway, owner Barry Baker said people smashed through windows and destroyed mini blinds. They toppled a cabinet and cracked hammers over other glass display fronts and counters.
Most cases were empty except for some of Baker's wife Chevvy's sterling silver items, which intruders left. "They didn't take anything," they just wanted to create a mess, Baker said.
Hill said at one point he spotted a group of men emerge from large vehicles dressed in black and carrying backpacks. They headed into the crowds to begin destroying shops and other property, he said.
A TV crew aired a video, which Hill shared on his Facebook page, of one of the men using a hammer to smash a line of windows as he marched along a street.
Hill wrote on Facebook "that peaceful protests have been overshadowed by riots and looting, mainly from professional terrorists that are not from here and are not here on behalf of Breonna."
Greater Louisville Inc., the metro's chamber of commerce, released a statement from president and CEO Sarah Davasher-Wisdom pledging more involvement by the group: "We recognize the anger and frustration that has been building in our region and our nation in response to violent acts against communities of color.
"Greater Louisville must come together to strengthen the ties within our community, embrace diversity and seek meaningful change to build a truly inclusive economy. In the coming days and weeks, GLI will continue our outreach to business and community leaders so we can learn ways to impact change and contribute toward meaningful discussions about race and inequities in our region."
For his part, Kahdey worries that a $100,000 estimate for new glass and other repairs won't touch the real loss: the trust and confidence of residents and other tenants who may decide they'd rather move from downtown. The unrest may reverse years of work to make the Central Business District a vibrant, attractive place.
"It's the business owners that are have been left to pick up the pieces," he said.
Baker, who joined the enterprise founded by his uncle more than 30 years ago, predicted the shop could struggle to recover. But he's determined that it will see its 80th anniversary this year even if it means keeping retail customers away and focusing on his wholesale trade.
He was humbled recalling the kindness of strangers who stopped in early Saturday morning to lend a hand, sweeping up glass and helping restore order. A guy named Rex worked for more than two hours, Baker said.
He said he handed $50 cash to Rex when he took off only to have the man return moments later and hand the bills back. He told Baker: "I can't in good conscience take the money."
Walgreens employees inspect the front sliding doors at 5400 New Cut Road. The doors were damaged in overnight looting.
CVS Pharmacy employees survey the damage to a store at Fourth and Muhammad Ali in Louisville.
$$$
