LMPD showed on Derby Day it is tone deaf
09 Sep 2020
Whatever is on the other side of all these protests, whenever they end, the one thing that will need to happen will be an effort to rebuild trust between the police and the community.
Police cannot protect a community with which it's at war. And there is a sizable portion of the community — Black and white — that sees the Louisville Metro Police Department as the enemy.
The police department didn't help itself on Derby Day.
In fact, it reinforced the image that so many in the African American community and its supporters have of police — that the police department is here to protect white people and enforce rules against Black people.
It's an age-old complaint of African Americans who see such a higher percentage of their young men arrested and hauled off to prison, often for offenses like drugs that don't land nearly the same percentage of white people in jail even though studies show white and Black people use illegal drugs at roughly the same rate.
Derby Day was a two-act play that drove home that point.
When a group of white people wearing camouflage, flak jackets and carrying assault weapons marched to downtown's Jefferson Square to confront Black Lives Matter protesters, there wasn't a police officer to be found.
There were some tense arguments. Some pushing and shoving.
And it wasn't clear what would erupt next.
But the police laid back, saying most of their resources were deployed protecting Churchill Downs, where they expected large protests to occur later in the day.
I call horse manure, on that.
Police knew the group, led by a fella named Dylan Stevens, who calls himself "the Angry Viking," was meeting at Cox Park and planned to head downtown at some point. Had they been following on social media, they would have known when the group left the park, regrouped at Waterfront Park, and when they started their march to Jefferson Square Park where the BLM protesters gather each day.
Had they been following The Courier Journal's Matt Glowicki on Twitter, they would have had 82 minutes notice to move officers into place to stop the two sides from confronting each other — which we know can be deadly from similar clashes in Kenosha, Wisconsin, and Portland, Oregon.
Instead, they allowed the heavily armed Trump supporters to advance on the park and then only moved officers in after most of the Trump-supporting militia members had retreated and the ones who remained were outnumbered by BLM protesters.
According to a statement from Louisville Metro Police, officers didn't intervene at first because "Due to the size of the crowd, we determined it was not safe to go in."
So, they let a situation they knew about in advance get out of hand and then refused to intervene to defuse it? Are you kidding me?
The second act played out four miles away outside Churchill Downs, which was surrounded by temporary fencing, police and Kentucky National Guardsmen, and roads in and out were blocked by dump trucks and other big vehicles.
When the group Until Freedom arrived at the fence, it was greeted by officers and guardsmen.
The group has conducted several non-violent protests in Louisville in recent weeks. Before the group left Louisville's South Central Park to march to the racetrack, one of the organizers urged those attending to step in and stop anyone who might get "out of control."
It was a mix of white and Black protesters — but predominately Black — demanding justice for Breonna Taylor, the African American woman who was shot and killed by Louisville police officers in her apartment March 13.
As Until Freedom marched around the track, a large contingent of officers and guardsmen — some of them in Humvees and police vehicles — mirrored their movements, but from inside the fences.
When Until Freedom arrived on Central Avenue, near Churchill's main gate, just before the Derby was to run, they stood behind a fence that was more than five feet tall.
Dozens of police in riot gear and carrying long sticks in case they needed to bash heads moved into position and formed an intimidating line along Central Avenue between the peaceful protesters and the track.
It looked like they were preparing for war.
And it wasn't necessary.
There could have been a handful of cops in their regular uniforms stationed along Central. There could have been more officers high up in Churchill watching the crowd through binoculars.
And there could have been more officers held in reserve just a few football fields away in case the peaceful protesters turned and tried to breech the fence.
But police allowed the white, Trump-loving, heavily armed militia to march freely through the streets and force a confrontation with BLM protesters, but sent out the shock troops wearing military gear when peaceful protesters arrived at the track.
And that's only part of why African Americans in Louisville don't trust police.
But we're not going to be able to solve the more substantive problems involving race and policing as long as police are so tone deaf when it comes to how their actions are perceived.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
$$$
