'My voice is my marching shoe'
Menderski, Maggie
12 June 2020
Mattie Jones' feet can't march the way they did 60 years ago, but even at 87 years old, that hasn't kept her from joining the modern Black Lives Matter movement for equality. The lips that once shouted boldly even without a bull horn from the front steps of Louisville City Hall during the civil rights movement now welcome conversations at her West End front porch. They talk about what needs to happen next to end systemic racism and whether the mayor and local leaders are doing enough to bring justice for Breonna Taylor, who was shot while asleep in her bed by a Louisville Metro Police officer serving a no-knock warrant.
After decades of activism – she was honored earlier this year with the 2020 Martin Luther King Jr. Freedom Award presented by the city of Louisville for a lifetime of social justice work – her face is one you'd expect to see in the crowd of the largest equality movement of this generation. She's a founding member of the National Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression and she also fought for the Justice Resource Center in Louisville alongside the late Rev. Louis Coleman. For Jones, it's always been more than a human rights movement. It's God's calling.
But she's of a different time.
"My voice is my marching shoe now since I'm older, and I can't do what I used to do," Jones told me when I called her at her west Louisville home Monday afternoon.
"My mouth is not old, and my mind is still on freedom."
For two weeks, crowds have flooded in the streets in Louisville and throughout the country in outrage over the killings of Taylor and George Floyd by police officers in a way that feels reminiscent of the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
When you look at the photos from the era of Martin Luther King Jr. and compare them to the images that have followed this spring, it's hard not to see similarities.
There are signs, there are crowds and there are people begging to be heard.
But today those crowds are larger, more multiracial and seemingly blanketing every part of our country.
And there are iconic figures like Jones, who've been fighting for humanity their whole lives, missing from the throng.
Missing, yes, but not uninvolved.
I spent Monday on the phone with Jones and some of Louisville's eldest activists to learn how they're carrying out their cry for equality when their muscles have aged and their bones don't move as swiftly as they once did. The COVID-19 pandemic causes barriers, too. These activists aren't just faced with the tiring miles that could be marched and the damaging heat of the June sun – there's also a virus that's known for preying on our oldest generation.
That generation led the Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott and the Greensboro, North Carolina, sit-ins. They were Freedom Riders, and they led the Nothing New for Easter boycott of downtown Louisville businesses in 1961.
So how are they making their voices heard now? It's what I hoped to learn from Jones and her contemporaries.
This column started with an email from the Courier Journal's former sports editor, Rana Cash, who recently took a promotion in Savannah, Georgia.
At 70 years old, Cash's mother wanted to protest Floyd's death, who was killed when a Minneapolis police officer pushed his knee into his neck for more than eight minutes, and systemic racial injustice, but she didn't feel safe going out late at night.
So after much consideration, Cash's mom decided that when she met people as she ran errands, she would ask them, "To whomever you pray, would you mind just saying a prayer for our country? And if you don't pray, can you meditate and include it in your thoughts?"
Cash thought that was powerful, and genuinely, so did I. I wanted to hear what others were doing.
So over the course of a few hours, I spoke with Jones as well as Raoul Cunningham, Gracie Lewis, and Virgil and Colene Todd.
They were all in Louisville back when the signs said "Open housing now" and "Civil rights for all" instead of "Justice for Breonna" and "No justice, no peace."
Make no mistake, their hearts were still very much on the issues even if their feet aren't clocking the same steps they used to.
More people need to get to the polls and vote in leaders that are in tune with systematic racism and how to eliminate it, they told me. More resources need to be made available to prime more black leaders for office. Barriers to education and housing need to be lifted. Police departments need to be reformed, and officers who commit terrible crimes on the job need to be held accountable. Qualified immunity must end.
Racism needs to be addressed in schools, and our nation's darkest history and present problems can't be glossed over.
People need to change their minds about what they think they know about inequality, but even more than that, people need to change their hearts.
Those are the messages, but getting them across looks different for these activists than it did 60 years ago.
"I sincerely believe that we're at a point in time of history changing, a major inflection point in the racial history of this world," Virgil Todd told me. "I feel as if I've really been blessed to see so many major changes in my lifetime."
Those changes didn't come easy, either.
As teenagers, the Todds' lives were filled with homework, college ambitions and repeated arrests when they doubled as students and protesters in the 1960s.
The couple, now in their 70s, have vivid memories of being crammed into the back of a police paddy wagon with as many as 25 other protesters, and the officers would crank up the heat just to make them more uncomfortable. Then after all that, they'd get up the next morning and go to classes.
Sixty years later, Colene still doesn't like being in the middle seat on airplanes. That claustrophobia from those harsh tight spaces has stuck with her all these years.
When they heard about the first protest two weeks ago, they got in their car and drove to Main Street eager to join in. Colene had cried for days when she'd heard about Floyd's death. She'd never seen anything like the video of the officer killing him, she told me.
But the closer they got to the courthouse that night, the more the protests didn't feel like what they remembered as kids. They knew peaceful protests, and here they saw guns among the crowd.
"'Colene, we have got to be insane, we cannot do this,'" Virgil recalled telling his wife, as he told me the story of how they turned around and went home.
By the time the crowd dispersed, riots and looting had hit downtown.
Instead, they've been supporting the changes in their own way. Virgil has a Sunday school group that he's putting his energy into, and Colene is encouraging people to register to vote and get to the polls. They know the systematic problems can't change until leadership does.
While the Todds have stayed away from the physical protests, Cunningham, the 77-year-old president of the Louisville chapter of the NAACP, has been to three of the demonstrations.
He joined the Louisville NAACP Youth Council in 1957 at the age of 14, and his activism led him to manage the successful campaign to elect Georgia Davis Powers as the first African American and the first woman to the Kentucky Senate. Cunningham was inducted into the Kentucky Civil Rights Hall of Fame in 2003, and the city of Louisville awarded him the Martin Luther King, Jr. Freedom Award in 2006.
I asked him what the major differences were between today's movement and what he remembers from the 1960s.
What we're seeing today predominately centers on police brutality, he told me.
Then he walked me back a few decades to when the demonstrations focused on ending segregation and being able to participate more fully in American life. He recalled taking nonviolent pledges each night before they headed out into the streets.
Then, he reflected on the passing of time.
"The difference to me is in the 1960s, I marched, and at the age of 77, I'm not able to march that much," he told me.
It's time to change the system, and he's among those involved in a group tasked with creating Louisville's new civilian review board, which was formed after the protests heated up in late May.
"I do think that the demonstrations today are as important and relevant as they were in the '60s," he told me. "Although they're different circumstances, I think they are as important."
Gracie Lewis, 72, has mostly stayed out of the sun, the heat and the masses during this movement.
She made an exception, though, for Taylor's birthday celebration on Saturday, when a shower of blue and white balloons was released in the young woman's honor. Organizers temporarily turned Jefferson Square Park downtown into a festival of sorts that both celebrated the young woman's life and pushed for change.
"It was the most beautiful thing," she told me, as she talked about the crowd members who were young and old, black and white, and so much more.
Lewis recalled seeing children as young as 6 years old saying "no justice, no peace" – that's not something you would have ever seen in the 1960s.
"We don't want this generation to be fighting this issue all over again, I want to see it completely ended now," she told me. "These young people have plenty of energy to be able to create a whole new world. I'm just so glad I'm here to see it done."
When I asked Lewis – who's a member of the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights Civil Rights Hall of Fame – what inspired her most about the movement, first she counted through about all the people and the different groups who came together to make that Saturday memorial happen. Then she called me back a little while later and stressed that the overwhelming desire to get justice for Taylor is what made that day special.
Now she's encouraging people to go to the polls and push for a leadership that's ready to embrace change.
"This is really a moment that has turned into one of the most beautiful movements across the world," she told me. "Nothing is really ever going to be the same."
$$$
