Viral video of Louisville U-Haul van hauling, unloading protest signs outrages conservatives
Tobin, Ben
28 Sep 2020
A viral video of a U-Haul van being used to unload and pass out protest signs and shields has national conservative politicians and pundits decrying protests in Louisville as "planned, orchestrated events" that are unsafe and violent.
Appearing on Fox News on Thursday morning, Kentucky House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy was asked about the video from Wednesday of the U-Haul van transporting protest gear.
"This is very concerning to me, not just here but throughout the nation," McCarthy said. "... There's this video of a U-Haul pulling up and opening up the back. Everyone knew exactly where it would be and where to go. They show up and out come shields, out come signs ... and out come the riot gear."
The video, however, gives no indication that riot gear or weapons are being taken from the back of the truck. McCarthy went on to question "who is funding this?" and suggested that the FBI should look into it.
Right-leaning political commentators, including Laura Ingraham and Tucker Carlson, have echoed that funding question.
Some have even gone so far as to say the U-Haul belonged to anti-fascist, or antifa, activists who passed out weapons and was funded by someone connected to billionaire George Soros, a Democratic megadonor who has been named in myriad conspiracy theories.
Politifact, a nonpartisan fact-checking website, ruled the claim regarding the U-Haul truck as "mostly false." The website said "some of the signs bear a symbol associated with antifa activists," but there is "no connection" between Soros and the truck.
The video comes as protests get increasingly tense in Louisville. On Wednesday, a grand jury chose not to indict any of police officers for fatally shooting Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman killed in her apartment March 13.
Protests ensued throughout the weekend following the grand jury's announcement. Two Louisville police officers were shot Wednesday but will recover.
President Donald Trump chimed in on the shooting late Wednesday evening.
"Praying for the two police officers that were shot tonight in Louisville, Kentucky. The federal government stands behind you and is ready to help," Trump tweeted. "Spoke to (Gov. Andy Beshear), and we are prepared to work together, immediately upon request!"
Beshear, the Democratic governor of Kentucky, said he and Trump agreed that things are under control. He added that he "appreciated the offer."
$$$
