Local artists design Black Lives Matter cycling jersey
Adams, Kirby
09 July 2020
As a local ceramic artist, Amy Elswick designs and creates decorative wall pieces, dinnerware and even bathroom sinks in her studio, Clay House Pots located at 741 E. Chestnut St.
But last month, amid protests over the police shooting deaths of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor, Elswick found herself moved to create something altogether different than her fine arts ceramics.
"I just really wanted to make a statement for the Black Lives Matter movement and to promote racial justice," Elswick said. "Since I cycle a lot, and so do my friends, it has led to the design of a bicycle jersey."
Elswick felt like her own back would be a fine place to carry a message that would be seen all over town while she rides her bicycle. She's hoping other cyclists will also take up the cause and carry the message for justice as they pedal around Louisville.
Fellow cyclist John Mahorney, owner of Jem Creative Designs, 810 Vine St. donated his time to design the jersey.
Additionally, after speaking with the chairperson for the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression Elswick and Mahorney created room on the jersey to support Black-owned businesses with free space to showcase their logos.
Businesses on the jersey include kr8vTravels, Ed Hamilton Studio, O.P.P. - Other Peoples Printing Company, Six Forks Burger Company, Kizito Cookies, Mr. B's Bike Camp,Seidenfaden's Cafe, Louisville Cream, Art FIsh (Carlos Fish, artist), Sowing Seeds with Faith, Cabookie Cupcakes, KR8VNN8VS Records and Happy Endings.
Elswick said there will be no profit made from the sale of the shirt, but she did add a few dollars to each order, which will be a donation to the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression.
The jersey is $65 and can be ordered in a variety of sizes. Online orders must be placed at https://www.peak1bikestore.com/cyclists-for-racial-justice/ by Sunday, July 12 and will be shipped directly to your address.
"It's been a collaborative effort," Elswick said, "I just really wanted to spread the message, and I can't wait to wear this jersey when I ride."
$$$
