Black cop retires amid city protests
Kenning, Chris
17 June 2020
After weeks of protest over police violence, Andre Bottoms, a veteran Louisville police officer who is Black, typed out his farewell.
Bottoms, 52, said he's retiring from the Louisville Metro Police Department, where "things need to change."
"The city, state and the department can create new laws and new policies for officers, which is a step in the right direction. However, the real change must come from within," Bottoms wrote Thursday in a Facebook post that drew hundreds of comments.
"It is tough being a Black officer, seeing time after time Black men killed at the hands of police. Some justified, and some not," he wrote.
In an interview Friday, he cited his family's worries about his safety and a desire to finish a college degree in deciding to retire.
His departure offers a glimpse into the wrenching struggles faced by the country's Black officers amid a national reckoning over policing, violence and Black communities.
So far, Louisville Metro Police officials have not reported a large exodus of officers.
But at least some officers are considering leaving the department, retiring or finding new positions, he said. Many are unclear about its future direction, Bottoms said.
"The whole thing's a mess right now," he said.
And Black officers in particular "are struggling right now."
"We're told to go and protect these protests and deal with rioters. And meanwhile, you're struggling with the fact that (what happened to George Floyd) ... wasn't right. I should be protesting with them."
Bottoms, in his Facebook post, hinted at the strains coming from every side.
"We get ridiculed from Black people, labeled as sellouts, or Uncle Tom. But people do not look at that I am Black first, all day, every day, and an officer second," he wrote.
Police spokeswoman Alicia Smiley said recently that it was "a challenging time for officers" who faced "daily criticism" and canceled days off, but she said droves of police are not quitting.
Frustration within the police department has also been building against Mayor Greg Fischer, who Fraternal Order of Police officials have said made officers feel "completely unsupported and disrespected." Dozens walked out on Fischer at a recent roll call meeting.
Does LMPD have the leadership to change? First hired in 1991, Bottoms left in 2014 as a narcotics officer and returned in 2016. His decision to retire now wasn't easy, he said Friday.
"I did not want to feel I was abandoning my brothers, because it's almost like a family," he said. "But with all this going on, I had to look at the fact that there are times within the police department that need change. And I don't know if there's the leadership in place to make those changes."
Bottoms worked during the day and didn't face the more contentious clashes between police and demonstrators protesting the deaths of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman shot by Louisville police in her home, and George Floyd, a Black man who died after a Minneapolis police officer pressed a knee on his neck as he pleaded for air while handcuffed.
In Louisville, the police chief has been fired, and on Thursday, the Metro Council passed a ban on no-knock warrants, which were used in the Taylor case. Civil rights attorneys argue that police raided Taylor's home without warning or good reason, surprising Taylor's boyfriend who fired a shot, believing his house was being robbed.
Police responded, firing more than 20 rounds and killing Taylor. No drugs were found.
A cop stopped for being Black Bottoms, in his Facebook post and an interview, recalled a frightening incident that was one of several that demonstrated even when he was an officer, "it did not shield me from being stopped by the police for no apparent reason."
During the 1990s, he said, he was visiting a friend at a Hurstbourne-area apartment complex when four plainclothes Jefferson County officers looking for a suspect drew guns on him.
He very nearly drew his own weapon in response, thinking it was a robbery, he said.
"If I would have made any wrong move, I would have been shot dead on the spot," he said in an interview. "They didn't have a suspect. They were stopping anybody (who was) Black that went to the building because they thought they were connected to this drug dealer."
Despite the promise of a "top-to-bottom" review of the police department, Bottoms said leaders need to talk to officers for honest assessments of policing behaviors.
"I already know they're gonna go out and do what they normally do. They're going to go and talk to community leaders, have like town hall meetings, talk to the public and get input that way. And that's fine," he said. "But they need to start by asking within the department. What are we doing wrong? What do you see? What have you experienced? If they get that from the actual officers, they can do a better job of affecting change."
Asked about the prevalence of racist attitudes in the department, as some protesters contend, he said it was a minority but acknowledged it was an issue among some.
"You need officers to step up and tell fellow officers that racist jokes will not be tolerated and are unacceptable. We need officers to step up and intervene when they see another officer verbally and physically abusing another citizen," he said. "We need officers to tell their superiors when officers are conducting illegal traffic stops because they are 'fishing.'"
When cops treat white and Black people differently Working over the years in narcotics and in the Sixth Division, which includes Newburg and other areas, Bottoms said most officers strive for equal treatment.
But he recalled seeing unequal policing that at times made him "furious."
"So if you're going to give a white citizen a courtesy notice and not going to pull them out of the car and ask to search, then be fair across the board," he said. "If he's Black, and that's all he is, is Black, and the only thing he's done is a minor traffic infraction, then why are you pulling him out of the car? Why are you running a dog around his car, why are you searching his car?"
Despite peer pressure and fears that raising concerns will scuttle career advancements, he said, "We need more officers to step up if they see something that's wrong or not fair, to speak out."
He said most officers do the right thing, even though few get recognized. He said he became an officer because of professionals he looked up to as a child and wouldn't change his career. He said he was proud of serving with "many good men and women at LMPD."
Bottoms said he was surprised at how widely read his Facebook post, shared more than 1,000 times, was.
"I encourage white officers who do not understand exactly why Black people are so upset, and where their frustrations come from, to sit down and speak to a Black citizen or Black officers and ask them about their experiences with the police," he wrote.
Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@gannett.com or on Twitter @chris_kenning.
Police fire pepper balls at protesters as they occupied West Jefferson Street on Monday evening.
$$$
