Jackson urges athlete boycott of state
Yates, Dominique
25 Sep 2020
Civil rights activist Jesse Jackson is calling for athletes to boycott the University of Louisville and the University of Kentucky. This statement comes just one day after a grand jury chose to indict former Detective Brett Hankison on three counts of first-degree wanton endangerment related to the Breonna Taylor case but not the other two officers involved.
Hankison's charges are related to firing his weapon into the apartments of Taylor's neighbors, not for the shooting death of the 26-year-old.
"The players in the WNBA, NFL & NBA must discourage high profile athletes, basketball & football players, from going to the University of Kentucky & the University of Louisville," he said on Twitter. "We must make economic life in KY inconvenient. This tactic has always worked for oppressed people."
Jackson also called for a boycott of "every nonessential service in Louisville," which he said includes horse racing.
The longtime civil rights activist visited Louisville in June, calling for U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., to end opposition to an anti-lynching bill.
Tension were high Wednesday, with more than 100 arrested and two police officers shot during protests in downtown Louisville.
While he's encouraging boycotts in the state, he also made it clear he wants peace and big voter turnout in the upcoming election.
"The death of #BreonnaTaylor murdered by police in her home at night, creates anger," Jackson said. "In 41 days there will be a new President. In 41 days, there will be a new AG. In the meantime, Kentucky should be off limits. There must be massive peaceful protests. We must march to the polls."
During Gov. Andy Beshear's Thursday press briefing, he said he doesn't agree with Jackson's boycott proposal.
"They didn't have any control, UK or U of L, over what the grand jury did," Beshear said. "I believe they are trying through programs and efforts to build a better world. I very much respect Rev. Jackson, I don't agree with the boycott of those that have had no control over this."
Beshear did, however, call for Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron to release his office's findings in the Taylor case to the public.
"I think if he did, this call for a boycott wouldn't have happened, yet, because everyone would have been sitting down and be trying to process through facts and evidence that's out there, and I think everyone benefits from the truth," Beshear said.
$$$