24 days of Louisville protests about more than Breonna Taylor
Gardner, Hayes
21 June 2020
Breonna Taylor's name is written on the biggest banner in Jefferson Square Park – which many hope will be renamed in her honor. A ringed memorial for her sits in the square's middle. Her name fills Louisville's streets and echoes under overpasses each night, prompted by "Say her name!" chants, and a law with her as a namesake has already been passed.
That doesn't mean the 24 days of protests are about Breonna Taylor, however. At least not solely.
"It's not about Breonna Taylor, but it is," said Selina Marlow, a 33-year-old Black woman.
For many, the lengthy protests, which have now lasted longer than the Ferguson, Missouri, unrest of 2014, are about personal experiences and change. But for Marlow, it's all about Hope.
Marlow has a 2-year old daughter, her "little girl," whom she named Hope for a reason, she said. On Tuesday, Marlow brought a camera to the protest, snapping photos, documenting history and participating in what she believes will lead to an improved world. Marlow said she had an unfair encounter with police as a young woman that negatively, and permanently, changed her life, and that she wants better for her daughter.
"This is her future," Marlow said. "If I don't make things change now, then I'm going to have to fear for her life, the rest of my life."
But hope is complex.
Some of the hundreds of protesters who gather downtown each day aren't sure things will ever fully change, that systemic racism is too embedded in society for it to be removed. Others believe there is reason to anticipate healing.
"That's why we're out here, right?" Marlow said softly. "That's the hope."
Attendance at protests has tapered since the first few, eventful days, but a dedicated group remains vigilant, marching the streets each night. Most vocally and most pressingly, they are demanding for the police officers involved in Taylor's death to be fired and prosecuted; however, some said that wouldn't pacify them.
"We want that to happen sooner rather than later. We want that to happen first, but this is deeper than that," 23-year old Issa Fixit said.
Taylor may have been the "catalyst" for the protests, as 24-year-old Black protester Shea Lewis described, but it's more tangled than that.
It's about police officers and the way they treat people of color, protesters say. It's about losing relatives to police brutality, or having personal experiences of mistreatment. It's about getting the right people in power and changing systems and institutions. It's about lifelong Louisville residents battling racism.
That's what has prevented the nucleus of protesters from slowing down and what has prompted them to conclude each evening in the same way that a protester did Monday night after dodging pepper balls on Jefferson Street, with a "See you tomorrow."
Fixit has been protesting for more than three weeks, but he repudiates the idea that doing so takes "stamina." As a young Black man, he says, it requires no motivation.
"They're tired of us, but we're not tired, and we're not gonna be tired," he said. "We're pissed off."
The protest itself is a habitual act. A steady current of protesters arrive throughout the morning, afternoon and early evening each day at Jefferson Square Park as organizers convene in a tent. The atmosphere is often festive, like a family reunion or a cookout.
"It's church," one preacher's son said.
Those gathered discuss the mundane – their day, their dog, or if the NBA's Chris Paul can guard Murray State product Ja Morant – as well as the consequential: the Black Lives Matter movement or if they've undergone the swab test for the coronavirus.
Food is served in the evening, and then around 8 p.m., organizers begin the march and lead continuous chants throughout the streets as protesters on bicycles and in cars block off streets and hand out water.
The protesters are almost always peaceful, but with notable instances of mayhem, including 17 arrests Wednesday morning. On Monday, a man slung a brick onto a WLKY news van, breaking the windshield. Instances like this are renounced by the bulk of protesters, who often cite the importance of attendance with a common refrain: "This is history."
And it's history participated in by a myriad people, young and old.
"After the protest, do you think your mom could pick me up from the walking bridge?" one teen asked on the phone this week, standing near an elderly man using a cane.
The movement has attracted a tireless group of people, linked by a common cause.
"I told my basketball team: I'm out here for y'all," said Bruce Sweeney, a Black youth basketball coach with a University of Kentucky Wildcat tattoo.
"I'm out here for Breonna. I'm really out here for a change, man. It's a long time coming. This is beautiful. I've never seen anything like this in my life. It's history in the making."
Ronnie Hogan is a 52-year-old white University of Louisville fan with an amputated leg who uses a wheelchair. He, like Sweeney, had never protested prior, but neither has missed a day over the past 24.
"This is the first time I've ever felt so strongly about something," Hogan said.
Those 24 days have run the gamut. There was gunfire on the first night, looting and rounds of tear gas on the second, the killing of David McAtee on the fourth, widespread and peaceful marches across the city for a number of days, and then 60 riot gear-clad police officers stationed on Jefferson Street firing pepper bullets and flash bangs on the 19th.
"From the beginning, it was love," said Sweeney. "Then it got sad, but then it got love and then it got sad, and then it got crazy. And then it got real."
When approximately 100 or 200 protesters take to the streets each night, their specific motivations vary from personal reasons to abstract ideas, but the crux remains consistent: change, improvement, hope.
On Tuesday night, protesters marched down Muhammad Ali Boulevard past Dosker Manor, where many senior citizens live. As dozens of older Black residents poured onto their balconies and sidewalks to wave and watch protesters walk and chant, a trio of teenagers put their arms around one another while they marched into the night, past cheering onlookers and past a group of Black children, brightly tossing a football.
One marching protester turned to a young Black girl, no older than 5, who watched the throng stream by.
"This is for you, baby."
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
David Hampton, from left, marches with Jarell Morris, 5, Kit Wuebker and Marshawn Morris, 4, up Sixth Street in downtown Louisville on Wednesday night.
$$$
