Lawyers say police lied about search time, acted on 'stale' info
Duvall, Tessa
07 July 2020
Louisville Metro Police lied about the time of day they raided the home of a main suspect and arrested him in a narcotics investigation that led officers to Breonna Taylor's apartment the night she died, attorneys for her family claim in a new court filing.
Court records indicate that LMPD officers executed two search warrants as a part of a broader narcotics investigation — one at Taylor's apartment and another at a suspected drug house 10 miles away — both at the same time: 12:40 a.m. March 13.
But Sam Aguiar, an attorney representing Taylor's family in a civil suit against the three officers who fired their weapons, says that police actually executed the warrant for Jamarcus Glover and arrested him around midnight — well before entering Taylor's apartment.
The Taylor family's contention is that police had no need to execute the warrant at Taylor's apartment that resulted in her death, since they already had their main target in custody.
"LMPD's decision to reassemble a team to hit (Taylor's apartment on) Springfield, despite having already apprehended (Glover), was unreasonable, sloppy, unlawful and without probable cause," Aguiar's filing says.
A spokeswoman for LMPD did not immediately return a Courier Journal request for comment. The department previously has declined to comment on the lawsuit.
Accusations contained in lawsuits do not constitute evidence in a court of law and represent only one side of the argument.
The Public Integrity Unit investigation conducted by Louisville Police to determine if any of the officers should be charged is pending with the Kentucky attorney general.
Glover, 30, rented a home in the 2400 block of Elliott Avenue in the Russell neighborhood, according to Aguiar.
In his amended complaint, Aguiar says police initially recorded one time, then later altered the record to add 40 minutes — matching the search time for Taylor's apartment.
Officer Kelly Hanna Goodlett "originally identifies the Elliott search time at '12' on the warrant execution form, only to subsequently add a faint '40' later on to give the impression entry was made around the same time as entry to Breonna's," Aguiar wrote in the document, filed Sunday in Jefferson Circuit Court.
A copy of the seized property log left at 2424 Elliott Ave., provided by Aguiar to The Courier Journal, shows "12" written a darker, heavier print than the "40" for "time of search."
A copy of the seized property log turned in to the Circuit Court Clerk's Office after the March 13 search obtained by The Courier Journal shows the original time of search scratched out and replaced with "0040" on both pages of the document.
The time of the first item seized is logged as 0120.
The document provided by Aguiar is pink, while the document from the clerk's office is yellow. The two appear to be carbon copies of each other, though the "time of search" is different on each form.
The Courier Journal reached out to Glover's attorney about Aguiar's claims but did not immediately receive a response.
Aguiar told The Courier Journal that if the city would turn over body camera and security camera footage, as well as radio recordings, from Elliott Avenue that night, "this whole issue could be put to bed."
The Courier Journal requested body camera footage for 2424 Elliott Ave. the night of March 13 from LMPD on May 12, but the department denied the request citing an "open and ongoing investigation." The Courier Journal is appealing the denial.
Court records show that police previously had searched the Elliott Avenue home in December 2019 and subsequently arrested Glover on gun and drug charges.
Police also obtained a third search warrant for the home on April 21, with Glover again listed as a target. Glover was arrested a second time on April 22 after the warrant was executed, court records show, for additional drug and trafficking charges.
In the same filing, Aguiar alleged that the city wanted to force Glover out of the Elliott Avenue home as a part of a plan to develop the neighborhood.
A spokeswoman for Mayor Greg Fischer called the allegations "outrageous" and "without foundation or supporting facts."
Aguiar claims that not only did LMPD not need to search Taylor's apartment after locating Glover, officers acted using out-of-date information.
On the affidavit to obtain the search warrant for Taylor's home, Detective Joshua Jaynes wrote that Taylor had a white Chevy Impala, which was seen at Glover's home several times.
But Taylor had replaced the Impala with a Dodge Charger in January 2020, two months before the affidavit was written, Aguiar wrote.
On the night of March 12, LMPD Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly began his surveillance of Taylor's apartment before 10 p.m., Aguiar wrote.
Aguiar wrote that the surveillance done by Mattingly was "poor." Otherwise, he alleged, police would have known that neither Glover nor any other of the investigation's main targets were at Taylor's home that night.
"If done accurately, he would have confirmed that Breonna arrived home early in the evening with her boyfriend, Kenny Walker; that each of their cars were present in front of the home and that there was nobody else at the home," Aguiar wrote.
Additionally, Aguiar wrote that Glover and another suspect, Adrian Walker, who is not related to Kenny Walker, drove similar cars to Taylor and her boyfriend.
Glover and Adrian Walker had been seen driving a red Dodge Charger and a black Chrysler 300, which is the same car Kenny Walker owns, although his is a different model year.
"If Mattingly had simply run the tags on Breonna's and Kenny's vehicles, it would have been clear that neither of these vehicles belonged to (Glover) or (Adrian Walker)," Aguiar wrote.
Of the three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment — Mattingly, Myles Cosgrove and Brett Hankison — only Hankison has been fired from the police department.
Aguiar argues that Hankison's "reckless, willful and unjustified deadly force" led to "at least one of the fatal shots."
Hankison was officially fired by LMPD on June 23 for his role in Taylor's death.
Interim Chief Robert Schroeder wrote in a letter that Hankison showed "extreme indifference to the value of human life" and that his use of deadly force was improper because he failed to verify it was directed against someone who posed an immediate threat.
Schroeder accused Hankison of "blindly" firing 10 rounds into Taylor's apartment and the one next door, and made his remarks based on his review of the department's internal investigation into the shooting.
"I find your conduct a shock to the conscience," Schroeder repeated. "I am alarmed and stunned you used deadly force in this fashion."
Hankison is appealing his termination.
The department has not publicly released any ballistics reports from Taylor's death or said which officers fired the fatal shot or shots, or even if all three fired shots that hit Taylor.
No officers have been criminally charged for Taylor's death.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Inside
Louisville protest livestreamers allege police are targeting them. 3A
Copies of Jamarcus Glover's arrest citation and the clerk's copy of the search warrant for 2424 Elliott Ave. both show the original time of the search crossed out, according to a new court filing.
provided by Sam Aguiar
Breonna Taylor
provided by Tamika Palmer
$$$
