Governor asks to have Capitol Jefferson Davis statue removed
Sonka, Joe
12 June 2020
FRANKFORT — Gov. Andy Beshear has asked a state commission to hold a special meeting Friday and vote to remove the statue of Jefferson Davis from the Capitol Rotunda in Frankfort — after which he hopes to see it exit the building "as quickly as possible."
Beshear said at his daily press briefing on Thursday he expects the members of the state Historic Properties Advisory Commission to follow his advice and vote at their 1 p.m. meeting to remove the statue of the Confederate president.
The governor said it is "long past due" to remove the statue, adding that some kids visiting the Capitol see it "as a symbol that they don't matter, a symbol of the enslavement of their ancestors and a symbol of the continued systematic racism that we see in so many parts of our society."
The commission, which manages state artwork and historic sites, is made up of 14 members, including four Beshear appointees and five appointed by former Gov. Matt Bevin.
The remaining five members of the commission who serve via their position are first lady Britainy Beshear and the directors of the Kentucky Historical Society, Historic Properties, Kentucky Heritage Council and Governor's Mansion.
Gov. Andy Beshear said last week he is committed to removing the statue of Davis, calling it a symbol of slavery that divides Kentucky.
Thursday morning before the announcement of the commission meeting, state Sen. Chris McDaniel announced he is prefiling a bill to move the Davis out of the Rotunda and replace it with a statue of African American U.S. Navy hero and master diver Carl Brashear, a Kentucky native.
Referring to the Rotunda as a place to honor those who represent the best qualities of mankind, McDaniel, a Republican from Taylor Mill, said the leader of the Confederacy during the Civil War "falls short on every level."
"His crowning achievement was to serve as the head of the Confederacy in the movement that cost hundreds of thousands of Americans their lives," McDaniel said. "While there is no denying that he has a place in history, there is also no denying that his place in history is not one of honor."
The calls to remove the statue of the president of the Confederacy have grown in recent weeks as large protests proliferated around the country in reaction to the killings of several unarmed African Americans by police officers, including Breonna Taylor in Louisville.
Protesters toppled a Davis statue in Richmond, Virginia, on Wednesday night. It had stood along that city's Monument Avenue since 1907.
The statue of Davis in Frankfort – not far from the statue of Kentucky-born President Abraham Lincoln in the Rotunda – was placed there in 1936 at the urging of the United Daughters of the Confederacy.
Brashear grew up in poverty in Hardin County, rising to become the first African American diver in the U.S. Navy. After having his leg amputated in an accident in 1966, Brashear rose to the rank of master diver just four years later.
The film "Men of Honor," released in 2000, depicted his rise from poverty and racism to become a master diver, with Brashear played by Cuba Gooding Jr.
McDaniel's bill would order the Davis statue to be moved to another location and appropriate $500,000 to commission and install a Brashear statue where the Confederate president once stood.
Noting that a previous effort to remove the Davis statue failed in 2018 after the Historic Properties Advisory Commission voted to remove only a plaque on the statue calling Davis a war hero, McDaniel said his bill could make its removal official when the legislature meets again next year – assuming Beshear and the commission don't act before then.
Former Gov. Matt Bevin said as a candidate for the office in 2015 that he supported removing of the statue, but he later opposed it as governor, saying it would be a "sanitization of history."
McDaniel said he was open to a discussion of other Kentuckians who may be worthy of a statue to take the place of Davis, but did not think anyone else could match up to the standards of Brashear.
Beshear said he wanted a "robust discussion" over what would go in the southeast corner of the rotunda in place of Davis, but said Brashear was "an amazing Kentuckian and obviously someone worthy of conversation about having their statue there."
Both Beshear and McDaniel suggested that the Davis statue could be sent to the Jefferson Davis Monument State Historic Site in Todd County, where he was born.
OJ Oleka and Terrance Sullivan of the new group AntiRacism Kentucky also spoke Thursday in support of McDaniel's bill, with Oleka calling the Davis statue "a symbol of a time when the message was clear that black lives had less value."
$$$
