ChrisBeaty, ex-IUplayer, killed amid Indyprotest
Lindquist, David; Mack, Justin L
02 June 2020
Chris Beaty, who managed Indianapolis nightclubs and played football at Indiana University, was one of two men shot and killed in separate incidents over the weekend as violence erupted in Downtown Indianapolis
Beaty, 38, and Dorian Murrell, 18, were identified by the Marion County Coroner's Office as the victims of shootings reported late Saturday and early Sunday.
Beaty suffered multiple gunshot wounds in a shooting reported shortly before midnight on Saturday at Talbott and Vermont streets. He was pronounced dead at the scene.
Murrell was fatally wounded in a shooting reported around 2:30 a.m. Sunday in the area of Market and Pennsylvania streets. He was pronounced dead after being taken to Eskenazi Hospital.
Indianapolis police confirmed Sunday morning that one arrest has been in connection to the fatal shootings, but officials did not say which shooting the suspect was involved in.
Beaty founded events promotion company Fresh Marketing in 2011. He was the past operating partner of Revel nightclub, general manager of Dunaway's Palazzo Ossigeno and assistant general manager of 6 Lounge.
He graduated from Cathedral High School in 2000. Beaty played on the school's football team, which won 4A state championships in 1996, 1998 and 1999.
Former IU basketball standout Eric Gordon tweeted about Beaty overnight: "R.I.P. Chris Beaty. Was a great guy, we had some good times at IU. You will be truly missed bro."
With fellow entrepreneur Joe Babish, Beaty recently launched Worldwide Masks — a company that sells one-piece face coverings to prevent the spread of germs.
Beaty played for IU's football team from 2000 to 2003. He also co-hosted online talk show "Digital Universe" with DJ GNO and Freddie Long.
Downtown Indianapolis has been the site of clashes between police and protestors for three consecutive days.
In response to the violence, Indianapolis Mayor Joe Hogsett signed an executive order that placed Indianapolis under curfew from 8 p.m. Sunday to 6 a.m. Monday. Violators of the curfew were subject to arrest and fines.
Protests across the nation were sparked by the May 25 police-involved killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Floyd, a black man, died after a white officer pinned him to the ground under his knee. His arrest was captured on video and widely shared on social media.
Also powering the national protests are the deaths of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old ER tech who was shot and killed by 
$$$
