What's next?
Ladd, Sarah
13 Sep 2020
Recent years have seen the rise of the #MeToo movement, the Women's March, a stronger push for equal pay. More recently, Black women have led the charge at civil rights protests over the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and more. But what movement will define the coming era?
Abigail Adams pleaded with her husband, John Adams, to "remember the ladies" in a now-famous 1776 letter.
"All men would be tyrants if they could," the future first lady warned.
She also accurately predicted that "(i)f particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies, we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation."
Almost a century later, women from all over the country (and a few men) demanded in the Declaration of Sentiments that women were equal to men.
Still, it wasn't until 1920 that the 19th Amendment was ratified and suddenly, the ability to vote wasn't supposed to be based on gender. Women were classified as citizens, able to cast their ballots on Election Day. Even after that ratification, Black women continued to be disenfranchised at the polls.
This year marks the 100-year anniversary of that ratification, and The Courier Journal is celebrating with women-focused stories.
Women didn't stop at the vote. Amelia Earhart flew nonstop and solo across the Atlantic. Rosa Parks sat on a bus and effectively inspired the civil rights movement. Geraldine Ferraro ran for vice president.
In droves, women run for offices only ever held by men before them. They compute the trajectory of moon landings. They stand before juries and testify that trusted officials sexually abused them as children.
But what's next? Recent years have seen the rise of the #MeToo movement, the Women's March, a stronger push for equal pay. More recently, Black women have led the charge at civil rights protests over the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and more.
But what movement will define the coming era?
The Courier Journal asked some of Kentucky's women leaders what the next big movement for women will look like. Here's what they think in their own words:
Hannah Drake, poet and activist It's Time To Move Beyond Hashtags.
Admittedly, I have said "trust Black women" a million times because as a Black woman, I believe we hold the solutions to so many problems in the world. However, over time the mood and meaning of this hashtag started to shift for me.
"Trust Black women" is now becoming synonymous with allow Black women to do the work that white people do not want to do. "Trust Black women" is now becoming synonymous with allow Black women to do the work for little to no pay. "Trust Black women" is now becoming synonymous with allow Black women to generate creative work and allow white people to take the credit. "Trust Black women" is now becoming synonymous with allow Black women to clean up our mess.
Let me be clear, Black people, particularly Black women, do not exist to save white America from itself. Black people, particularly Black women, were not placed on this earth to rescue white people from themselves. To save yourself, you must take a long hard look in the mirror and put in the work.
Our existence, brilliance, creativity, strength, and ingenuity can never be validated by you posting a hashtag that means nothing when your actions do not support what you project online. "Trust Black women" means nothing if your policies and institutions do not seek to elevate Black women and help combat issues that impact Black women.
The next big move for women is truly trusting Black women and allowing Black women to lead with no apologies needed.
State Treasurer Allison Ball We will see more women elected to office, from the local level to national and federal offices. Right now, more than 200 Republican women are running for Congress, many having already won their primaries. Of this increase in female elected officials, I believe we will also see many younger females running for and winning office.
Younger women from both parties are running, and I want to do all I can to encourage this. There is truth in the saying, "You can't be what you don't see."
It used to be that it was rare for a woman to run, and if she did, she was older with a full career and family behind her. That's not the case now. When I was elected as treasurer in 2016, I was a single woman from Eastern Kentucky with a strong vision. When I ran the second time, I was married with a baby.
A woman's stage in life should not be a barrier to running for office. You can, in fact, have a personal life and professional life while in office. We all have important talents to offer, and I encourage any woman who is thinking about it to run.
Sadiqa Reynolds, Louisville Urban League president The next big movement for women should put Black women in front of the line, with a serious focus on the wage gap and political power. While the measure of annual earnings has narrowed for some, the gap between white men and Black women, often serving as head of household, is persistent and significantly larger. Focusing efforts allows all women to benefit. Furthermore, Black women have consistently shown support for Democrats, who have often gained office and been less than responsive to the needs of our community.
If there is to be true accountability for issues facing all families, a focus on the women leading the pack in voting and supporting women's rights and human rights should be prioritized. History shows that Black women overwhelmingly have trumpeted the concerns and causes of those most in need, even to our detriment. Thus, it is time for our sacrifice to be acknowledged and our advice sought.
Promoting Black women advances the cause of black people and all people because we have proven that we make decisions in ways that create forward motion for all.
Tori Murden McClure, Spalding University president Given the parallel tracks of racial inequity and gender inequity through our history, it always feels a little sketchy to claim oppression when people with dark skin are being killed. The 15th Amendment secured voting rights for (B)lack men (until state action abridged those rights). Women had to wait another 50 years.
In earlier days, I ranted about the "feminization of poverty." I did not consider the masculinization of wealth. Now, when I read protest signs that read "enough is enough," I think about the changes that must happen in government, economic, educational and social structures of power. Many have too little, because others do not understand the meaning of "enough."
When women are compensated equally for doing the same job, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
When fewer women are killed by their intimate partners than the number of Americans killed in foreign conflicts and military action, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
When as many men are jailed for engaging in prostitution as women, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
When the trade in human beings gets as much attention as the trade in soybeans, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
When the health insurance of the male is charged for one half the costs of a pregnancy, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
Four-hundred and seventy-six of Fortune 500 companies are run by men. Twenty-four of Fortune 500 companies are run by women. When that number rises, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
Among the 200 highest-paid people in the United States, 187 are men and 13 are women. When the number of women on this list rises, we will be moving in the direction of equity.
State Rep. Attica Scott We are living in the midst of one of the biggest movements of our lifetime and women are at the forefront.
While the movement for Black lives was born in the United States, it has global impact. It's times like now when women can use our collective power to build another world.
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah.Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Recent years have seen the rise of the #MeToo movement, the Women's March, a stronger push for equal pay. More recently, Black women have led the charge at civil rights protests over the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and more. But what movement will define the coming era?
illustration by jennifer williams/usa today network; getty images
State Rep. Attica Scott spoke during a protest of the Supreme Court ruling in favor of a Colorado baker who declined to bake a cake for a same-sex couple. The Fairness Campaign rally was held at Louisville's Metro Hall in 2018
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Ball
$$$
