Louisville's community is changing. So must our newsroom
23 Aug 2020
For the past 12 weeks, Louisville has been a prominent focal point in the sweeping conversation about systemic racism in America.
As a community, we've had a commanding front-row seat to the anger and resentment borne of decades of unfair treatment of Black people — not just in the West End, but across our city, across our commonwealth.
A fuse that has long existed — but one largely ignored by power brokers and politicians— – was lit with a fury when the public learned more about the March 13 death of Breonna Taylor. As the entire country now knows, she's the 26-year-old Black woman who died at the hands of three Louisville police officers who, armed with a no-knock search warrant signed by a judge, battered the door of her apartment in a drug raid.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, has said he heard pounding at the door, but he did not hear anyone announce they were police. Walker fired one shot, thinking intruders were breaking in. It struck one of the officers in the leg. They returned fire.
Taylor, unarmed, was shot and killed.
Little was reported initially about that night. Police details were sketchy and incomplete.
I also will share that we did not pursue the case as aggressively as we should have in late March and April. We did not find ways around the obfuscation from Louisville police, and we should have — even in the face of the fast-developing COVID-19 pandemic that consumed our staff and required around-the-clock coverage at the time as the number of positive cases and deaths began to soar.
Protests, most of them peaceful and nearly all of them focused on Taylor, took over downtown streets the last week of May.
They've grown in size and scope.
We've seen Kentucky's National Guard, canisters of pepper spray, vandalism, the death of a West End barbecue operator and a freelance photographer, shuttered businesses, plywood on downtown windows, the firing of a police chief, harsh criticism of our mayor and echoing demands for justice for nearly 100 days.
Three months after the start of the protests, Louisville is not the same.
That's meant superintendents, civic leaders, executives, politicians, pastors, professors, philanthropists and parents are having soul-searching conversations about race, equality, inclusion and the treatment of people of color.
And, so, too, are all of us at The Courier Journal.
Historical contradictions As I've learned since my 2018 arrival here, historical matters of race and reporting on Kentucky's diverse people, communities and issues make for a contradictory conversation inside our building.
It starts with our very formation. Founded in November 1868, today's Courier Journal came to be through the merger of the Louisville Morning Courier (which supported the Confederacy) and the Louisville Daily Journal (which opposed slavery).
One of its first and most famous editors was Henry Watterson, known as "Marse" — Southern for "master" — who fought for the Confederacy and edited the "Rebel" newspaper during the Civil War. Later, he expressed admiration for Abraham Lincoln, called for reconciliation between the North and the South and wrote in favor of new schools for Black children in Louisville.
In the past 120 years, our publishers, owners and editors denounced any form of anti-Semitism and called for school integration. When the Ku Klux Klan burned a cross near the mayor's home, The Courier Journal blasted the organization as "un-American and un-patriotic."
Yet, through 1942, we published a nationally distributed racist cartoon strip called "Hambone Says" that portrayed Black people with stereotypical drawings and used the N-word.
And editors insisted on calling hometown hero Muhammad Ali by his given name, Cassius Clay, for six years after he adopted his Muslim name in 1964.
A handful of years later, we published hundreds of stories and numerous editorials supporting a 1975 school busing plan in Louisville and won a Pulitzer Prize for photographs documenting the busing, including the iconic image of two 8-year-old boys — one Black, one white — shaking hands at Greenwood Elementary School.
In 1981, a seven-part series, "Being Black in Kentucky," earned national attention for its unvarnished look at what life was like for Black people in our commonwealth.
Which brings me back to today.
Well before Taylor's death, we knew we had work to do to create a more diverse staff and a more inclusive newsroom. We've made progress. But our efforts have not been good enough.
Let me give you three data points:
In Louisville, census figures show about one out of every four residents is Black. As of July 31, Black journalists comprise 13.3% of our staff. (As a larger metro region, the Black population is 14.5%.)
Across our metro area, the Latino/Hispanic population is closing in on 5.5%, but we lack that ethnicity in our newsroom. We also have no Native Americans.
Of our 11 newsroom editors, two are people of color, five are women and one is an openly gay man.
America as a whole is changing, and we need to ensure our newsroom changes, too.
Beyond the publication of unbiased and ambitious journalism, nothing is more important than reflecting the readers and the communities we serve. Over the past decade, we've not worked hard enough to recruit talented people of color, women and LGBTQ individuals.
We need to do better, Louisville — and we will.
Our parent company, Gannett, and its USA TODAY Network has pledged our newsrooms, which includes The Courier Journal, will match the diversity found in our communities by 2025.
I am convinced this newsroom can accomplish that even sooner.
A more diverse newsroom is more attuned to the changing face of our communities and the issues all readers and residents care about. It ensures our readers, especially a new generation of digital natives, see themselves in the coverage we provide.
Making progress While more work lies ahead, we've taken meaningful steps in the right direction over the past few months:
We hired a diversity and inclusion reporter in late 2019 to tell stories of segments of metro Louisville that have too often been ignored.
We have reassigned other reporters to listen closely to the protesters who are demanding fair treatment from police, business leaders and elected officials.
We resurrected in 2018 our editorial board and are using our Opinion pages, led by Senior Director Veda Morgan, to decry systemic inequalities and racial attitudes. We have seven members: two white men, two Black women and three white women.
In January, we formed a Diversity and Inclusion Committee that involves 16 staffers. They discuss our coverage, our shortcomings, our strengths and our recruiting. They're making us a better newsroom.
And next month, we will launch a Readers Advisory Panel that will tackle important issues affecting our communities, with this national reckoning on race being at the top of the agenda. (I am still adding to this group, so email me if you want to join us.)
The pursuit of great journalism is neither easy nor unchanging, especially at a time of unprecedented economic challenge and competition.
Yet, at this seminal moment in the history of our country, in Kentucky and around Louisville, The Courier Journal needs to ensure we are listening fairly to those who are protesting, investigating and preparing for the aftershocks of Attorney General Daniel Cameron's decision about potential charges against the three Louisville officers.
And, yes, whatever his decision, there will be aftershocks.
That means our newsroom must work even harder to reflect and understand the communities, issues and individuals we serve.
I look forward to discussing our progress in the weeks and months ahead. We will be transparent about our progress and (I hope, occasional) missteps. If you have thoughts, please, share them with me.
Stay healthy, Kentucky. And, as always, thanks for reading The Courier Journal.
Rick Green is our editor and can be reached at rgreen@courierjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter: @KentuckyRAG.
Richard A. Green
Editor
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
At Greenwood Elementary, Mark Stewart, then-8, seated, exchanges introductions with a new classmate, Darrel Hughes, also 8, on Sept. 3, 1975.
$$$
