Feeling at home
Yates, Dominique
07 Sep 2020
James Johnson loves football, but that's not even half of what his story is all about.
Some see the DeSales senior as one of the best players in the city and the state. The numbers back that up — 1,494 rushing yards and 19 touchdowns his junior season. He averaged 106.7 yards per game. At defensive end, he had 24 total tackles, a sack and an interception.
But those who really know him see an even more impressive person off the field. Just ask his family. They chose him.
"I'm adopted," Johnson said.
But he wasn't at first. The first five years of his life were spent in 17 different foster homes, everywhere from Arizona to California. He doesn't remember if he's met his birth parents.
He lived with his adopted mother, Kymberly Johnson, in Louisville for two years before his adoption was finalized when he was 7. She has three other adopted children.
It wasn't always easy though.
"He's been through a lot of rough times," Kymberly said. "I would say it was very difficult in raising him. I just prayed and asked God to give me wisdom and give me strength to be able to do what I felt like I was supposed to do."
James Johnson has struggled with anger his whole life.
He's felt abandoned, since he's never had a father. He's felt the frustration of feeling unwanted and an "I don't care" attitude that led to him getting in trouble. He admits he took that anger out on other people, including people in football. Due to his anger and low grades, his mother didn't let him play football for a year when he was younger.
He's been to counseling to cope with things.
"I kept instilling in him, in his head, that you're here. You're mine," she added. "Once I signed those papers, you took on my last name, and it doesn't matter where you were because you're into our family."
Through everything, James always found therapy in football, his love since he was 9 years old. He uses the motivation of being a great player to show his younger siblings, Jquan and Jayla, they can achieve great things, too.
"I'm working on it, but I still have problem with being told I'm wrong. I don't take it well," he said. "I realize that it's important for me to do what I need to do because I'm paving the way for my little brother and little sister. I've grown up."
While James is like many high school kids trying to live life, he's also learning about who he is off the football field. He went to protests for Breonna Taylor in downtown Louisville for 20 straight days. He even led some of the marches.
"I didn't want to protest at first," James Johnson admitted. "I thought it was kind of stupid. I didn't want to be involved in that stuff because I saw all the riots. I didn't want to get involved.
"My mom took me down there and I said, 'This ain't so bad.' I just feel my voice needs to be heard and other people's voices need to be heard."
DeSales has one of the better football teams in the area year in and year out. The team finished 10-4, won the district and regional championship and and came up two points short in its quest of playing for a state title last year. James is a big reason for that success last year, and he'll be needed to help lead the way in 2020.
"He's a Division I player," DeSales coach Harold Davis said. "He can go further than (college). He's got a lot of God-given (talent) — his speed, his size, all those things he has. It's important that he puts forth all the effort he can in order to be a position where (college coaches) offer him something. The goal for him is to grow up, be a mature, young man when he leaves here, and then hopefully move on to something bigger."
While that anger is still there inside James at times, Davis and the coaching staff have been impressed with his growth on and off the field.
"He's gone from being a problem as a freshman, and he's given us a few problems (still)," Davis said. "He's in a difficult situation, and we're aware of that with his background. He's become a leader.
"I remember his mom when he was a freshman, and he was being a little disrespectful and things towards her, and I didn't know them at all. She ended up telling me things about him, and I told her, 'If you need my help, let me know,' and she did. I only know one way to treat him, and it's if he's my son. We've had our times, but I always understand where he's came from and the difficulties growing up. It's amazing, hopefully he does well in school this year to get one of those Division I offers."
James says he has some offers from some smaller schools and has visited or had conversations with the likes of Louisville, Kentucky and Western Kentucky.
He's working to improve his grades to get better opportunities. With COVID-19 and the uncertainly of fall sports in the state of Kentucky, he's one of many seniors who would love that chance to have one more season to make another push at some top colleges.
"I pray every night that we have a football season," he said. "Sometimes I don't get no sleep because I'm ready for football practice the next day. I need this season. I'm sure a lot of other guys out here all over the city need it. This is a lot of people's way out, and it's positive on the youth."
Regardless of what his future holds with football, James Johnson will always have a family by his side and people who say he has a good heart.
"It gives me pride to hear his name called, because it shows him that he matters and he's accomplishing something that he wants to accomplish," Kymberly said about her son playing football. "He never has to touch a football, I just want him to be happy and for him to know that he can do anything he sets his mind to.
"James is a blessing. All my kids are a blessing. And I wouldn't change it. Even through everything that we've been through, I would do it again tomorrow if I had to. I'm a blessing to them. They're also a blessing to me. We learn a lot. We deal with a lot. And we still love."
Reach Dominique Yates. Cell: 502-595-9339. Twitter: @RealDYates. Email: dyates@courierjournal.com.
James Johnson, 17, center, led about 150 protesters as they marched from Jefferson Square Park to the campus of the University of Louisville on June 7. The marchers called for justice for those recently killed by law enforcement.
$$$
