The story behind one of the most compelling Louisville protest photographs
Stone, Matt
14 June 2020
On June 5, thousands gathered downtown at Jefferson Square in downtown Louisville to protest the death of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and David McAtee as well as honor what would have been Taylor's 27th birthday.
I was photographing the early scenes along with my Courier Journal colleague Dustin Alton Strupp before leaving to meet reporter Mandy McLaren. I photographed Savion Briggs, a 2020 Butler High School grad who, along with several other Jefferson County Public School graduates, was marching from Witherspoon Avenue to the steps of Louisville Metro Hall with their graduation caps on.
During the high school student march, the group stopped at the corner of Muhammad Ali and Floyd Street and kneeled on the hot pavement for 8 minutes and 46 seconds to honor Floyd — the time that Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin pressed his knee on Floyd's neck.
Students from Bellarmine University, as well as high school students, held a fist in the air as others replayed the scene caught on a phone video that sparked worldwide protests over Chavin's killing of Floyd.
Students cried out "I can't breathe" and "Mama, help me."
It was an emotional moment for them and for me.
The march continued where the students met hundreds of protestors that walked from Cardinal Stadium to Jefferson Square. It was during this time that the JCPS graduates gathered at the top steps of Metro Hall.
At around 6:10 p.m., my phone buzzed in my pocket — I usually have it on silent when I'm working because I don't want an unexpected ringtone to distract me from the moments I'm photographing. I saw it was my photo editor Mary Ann Gerth, so I moved away from some loudspeakers to try to talk to her.
She said the paper needed a scene setter, an image that shows how many people are at a particular scene and what it looks like. It's up to the photographer to try to make a compelling image rather than just "point and shoot."
My laptop was in my backpack in the trunk of my car a few blocks away — during the protest coverage I, as well as other photographers, try to carry the bare minimum equipment since we're walking up to 10 miles each day. I didn't think I could make the deadline if I relied on the usual work mode of a laptop and hotspot.
"Probably iPhone pic at this point. 15ish minutes," she texted.
OK.
The best vantage point I saw to show the crowd was at the top steps of Metro Hall. I hustled up to the top as students gathered. You could see the entirety of Jefferson Square filled with people. Students at the top pumped their fist in the air as speakers talked to the protestors. I felt the fist in the air, along with the thousands below in the streets and park, captured the emotion as well as the enormity of the day.
I framed it like I would with my regular camera and quickly shot a few frames with my phone. I worked up the best one with the app Afterlight and at 6:17 p.m., texted the photo to Gerth.
She responded 13 minutes later with "Great. If you want to send one more, go ahead!"
But I felt that one image worked best. I tweeted it as well.
At 6:47 p.m., she texted me what would be Saturday's front page with the headline 'WE'VE HAD ENOUGH' in all caps.
It wasn't until later that I saw all the tweets and Facebook responses from people sharing the image.
"If this photo doesn't stir something inside you, then you better check yourself for a pulse," said one.
"What a powerful front page," said another.
I hope the headline and photo together create one of the memorable front pages of The Courier Journal from this historic time.
Reach photographer Matt Stone at mstone@gannett.com. Follow him on Twitter @mattstonephotog.
An attendee of a rally in downtown Louisville in Jefferson Square did a fist pump in front of the crowd below, and was pictured on the front page of the Courier Journal on June 6.
$$$
