2 charged in altercation at protest
Tobin, Ben
19 June 2020
Two protesters involved in an incident with a driver in downtown Louisville on Wednesday morning have been charged with first-degree rioting and obstructing a highway, among other things.
The driver, who hit a protester with her vehicle as she was leaving a crowd, has come forth to the Louisville Metro Police Department but no charges were filed against her, according to LMPD spokesman Dwight Mitchell. The Jefferson County Attorney's Office is reviewing the case to determined if any charges will be filed, Mitchell said.
According to a police incident report, around 8:30 a.m. Wednesday, a group of protesters blocked the intersection of Liberty and Sixth streets and would not let the driver, operating a Buick LeSabre, pass.
The driver, whose name was redacted in the report, told police that protesters surrounded her car and "a verbal altercation occurred after which the protesters began to reach into her car, scratching her vehicle window ... and assaulting her, pulling her hair (pulling out a dreadlock)." Police say the driver sustained a minor injury.
The report goes on to say that the driver told police that after seeing one of the protesters with a handgun, she was "in fear for her life and drove away from the crowd." She subsequently hit one of the protesters running toward the vehicle.
The driver then stopped for a red light at the intersection of Liberty and Fifth streets when one of the protesters, Darius Anderson, approached the vehicle with a handgun and pointed it at the driver, according to report. The driver then drove off again.
Anderson, 21, was identified by video and later arrested later Wednesday morning, according to the report. He admitted to the incident in an interview after waving his Miranda rights and was charged with first-degree rioting, first-degree wanton endangerment, tampering with physical evidence, third-degree criminal mischief, second-degree disorderly conduct and obstructing a highway.
According to the report, after the incident with the driver, Louisville police officers observed Anderson handing off his handgun to Brioanna Richards, who then hid the weapon in a vehicle to "in an attempt to conceal evidence of the crime." Police then located the vehicle, consent searched it and confiscated the handgun.
Richards, 19, was also identified by video and arrested Wednesday morning. She waved her Miranda rights, admitted to the incident and was charged with first-degree rioting, tampering with physical evidence, first-degree disorderly conduct and obstructing a highway.
Anderson and Richards were both arraigned Thursday morning and are being held on cash bail for $7,500 and $2,500, respectively, according to court records.
This announcement comes after police said Wednesday morning's protest in downtown Louisville led to 17 arrests, five cars towed and one confiscated gun. Police released security camera footage of the car incident and were searching for the driver Wednesday before she came forward.
Following the release of the video, Louisville Metro Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, received backlash for taking to Twitter on Wednesday morning to criticize protesters for standing in the middle of the street.
"PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT: If you don't break the law and stand in the middle of the street, you don't get run over," Piagentini wrote in a tweet Wednesday morning. "Thank you for your time. Please share."
Dozens of people fired back at Piagentini, with some saying that the councilman was advocating for violence.
Louisville poet and activist Hannah Drake wrote in a tweet Wednesday that she is "embarrassed (Piagentini) is an elected official in my city."
"You would think he would use his platform as an elected official to try to help heal this community that HE SERVES," Drake wrote. "It's a disgrace he is in office and this is his attitude."
Piagentini later told The Courier Journal in an interview Wednesday evening that he "absolutely" rejects "any calls for violence against anybody."
"Clearly this had everything to do with a motorist who was fleeing for their life," Piagentini said.
Protesters in Louisville have now taken part in largely peaceful demonstrations for more than three weeks to demand justice for Breonna Taylor and David McAtee, who were fatally shot by police officers and the National Guard, respectively.
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
A person was hit by a car near Liberty and Sixth streets in downtown Louisville Wednesday. Another person pulled out a gun on the same car afterward.
courtesy lmpd
$$$
