Taylor's mother wants cops fired, end to violence
McLaren, Mandy; Costello, Darcy
02 June 2020 
"I don't think that I'm asking for too much, just justice for her. Just that people know the truth. What happened, that she didn't deserve this, that people are fired for doing this to her."
Tamika Palmer Mother of Breonna Taylor
As Breonna Taylor's mother called Monday for the firing of the Louisville officers who fatally shot her daughter, Metro Council members pushed for the conclusion of the monthslong investigation into the death.
"I don't think that I'm asking for too much, just justice for her," said Tamika Palmer, who stood in Frankfort alongside Gov. Andy Beshear at a press conference.
"Just that people know the truth. What happened, that she didn't deserve this, that people are fired for doing this to her."
Taylor was shot eight times and died in her hallway after Louisville police used a no-knock search warrant to enter her apartment in the early morning hours of March 13. Taylor's boyfriend said he thought intruders were breaking in and fired a shot that struck an officer.
Three officers returned fire, killing Taylor. They have been placed on administrative duty pending an internal investigation, which Metro Council members complain is taking too long.
On Monday, several members pressured Mayor Greg Fischer to put the full weight of his office behind the inquiry — demanding he turn over all the results to state officials no later than Friday.
"The fact that Breonna Taylor tragically lost her life in our community on March the 13th, and here we are, June the 1st, and that case has not been completed yet — is unacceptable," said Louisville Metro Council President David James, flanked by other members of Metro Council leadership.
Attorney General Daniel Cameron's office says it has not received all of the investigative information it needs to determine whether criminal charges should be filed against the officers who shot Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician.
"Without the entire case, the attorney general cannot begin," James said. "It's very simple."
Pressure to speed up the internal investigation comes as protesters continue to take to the streets demanding justice for Taylor, an unarmed black woman.
Fischer, in a separate news conference Monday, said his office was committed to a full and thorough investigation, conducted by multiple entities, including Cameron's office, the FBI and the U.S. attorney.
"We might have disagreements on any outcome, but we should all agree that we want the facts on this case," he said, adding that he, as mayor, does not have the power to relieve the officers, noting restrictions because of state law and the officers' collective-bargaining contract.
Cameron's office said Monday evening that the internal investigation into Taylor's death could be completed soon.
"It is now our understanding that (LMPD's Public Integrity Unit) will be concluding their investigation in the short term," spokeswoman Elizabeth Kuhn said. "We are continuing to determine what investigatory steps we believe need to take place. The FBI continues to conduct an independent investigation to determine if the officers' actions violated federal law, and our office is determining if any state laws were violated."
Palmer's call for the immediate termination of the officers involved in her daughter's death come as Louisville braces for a potential fifth night of protests — demonstrations that have been both peaceful and have included violent clashes with the police.
In her plea, Palmer said continued violence would distract from her family's desire to see those involved in her daughter's death held accountable.
"We can't get justice with violence," Palmer said. "It doesn't make sense. It doesn't help."
Beshear said he hoped giving Palmer the microphone would "help people feel that their voice, and their message is being heard, including right here at the highest levels in Frankfort."
"And I believe that what you heard today was that, yes, she wants justice," Beshear said. "... But she does not want violence as things move forward."
Louisville protesters have repeatedly called for the firing of Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove — the three officers Louisville Metro Police officials have said fired their weapons the night Taylor was killed.
Asked by a reporter Monday whether he agreed the officers should be fired immediately, Beshear did not provide a direct answer.
"I think I was one of the first that called for an independent review of the whole situation by multiple law enforcement agencies including the commonwealth attorney, the attorney general, and the FBI and the U.S. attorney," Beshear said. "And I think they all ought to look at it.
"... And at least in one officer's conduct and shooting through a window, I think that there are some major concerns there."
"I believe one of the biggest issues," Beshear told reporters, "is that the family feels like they haven't gotten all the information right, that they haven't been communicated with and things took too long."
Prosecutors have dismissed charges against Kenneth Walker, Taylor's boyfriend, who was at her apartment the night of the incident. Walker said he fired his gun at what he believed to be intruders, one of those shots allegedly wounding Mattingly, the sergeant.
Lonita Baker, a local attorney representing Taylor's family, also spoke at the morning press conference. The family wants to see the officers fired and ultimately charged, she said.
"There's no reason that they are still on LMPD payroll, as we sit here today," Baker said, adding that other jurisdictions facing unrest, including Minnesota and Georgia, have seen officials take "swift actions against police officers for misconduct,"
"But here, all we keep hearing about is due process," Baker said. "However, Breonna Taylor did not get her due process."
Shortly after Palmer spoke publicly, Louisville Metro Councilman Brandon Coan, D-8th District, wrote a post on Twitter calling for the officers to resign.
"If (Fischer) won't fire the officers who killed Breonna Taylor, then I am begging them: JUST RESIGN," Coan said. "Do it for Breonna and Kenneth Walker and their families. Do it for our city. And do it for your own souls."
Coan was joined Monday by Metro Council members Jessica Green, D-1st, and Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th, in calling for the officers' employment terminations. Green additionally called for them to be "arrested, indicted and convicted."
"I think it's a problem that they've remained a paid part of our police force," Coan said. "I can't fire them, but I can ask them to resign. I think it's the right thing for them to do. And I think it could be a first step on the long road to justice."
Mandy McLaren: 502-582-4525; mmclaren@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @mandy_mclaren. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/mandym.
"I don't think that I'm asking for too much, just justice for her. Just that people know the truth. What happened, that she didn't deserve this, that people are fired for doing this to her."
Tamika Palmer Mother of Breonna Taylor
Tamika Palmer, the mother of Breonna Taylor, speaks at the podium used by Gov. Andy Beshear for press briefings on Monday. Amid continued protests on the streets of Louisville, Palmer and her attorney, Lonita Baker, left, called for the officers involved in Taylor's death to be fired.
$$$
