How police act behind closed doors
14 June 2020
On May 31, I was with my fiancé (Stephanie Kornexl) and a former student (Ariana Tulay) in downtown Louisville marching and chanting, "No Justice! No Peace!" That day the police destroyed protesters' medical supplies and water, claiming there were "mason jars full of flammable material" and other harmful substances.
We experienced nothing but kindness from the protesters and knew people working those medical supply centers; we knew those supplies were safe. We could not sit back while people were fighting against systems of injustice they've inherited.
We ended up being trapped after curfew with the rest of the peaceful protesters. I livestreamed what I could, but it was difficult because the police were attacking us with tear gas, flash bangs and various projectiles. The group of protesters were forced to splinter in several smaller factions. We were with a bunch of young adults, most of whom were looking for a way to get home. But everywhere we turned, police were blocking off streets and shooting us with tear gas.
A teargas grenade hit my left foot and then blew up underneath me. My eyes burned. My lungs burned. Protesters ran away in pain. I could barely see. We were getting shot at. I'm not sure what was hitting me, but imagine being stung by a swarm of wasps attacking you from all directions and you'll get the idea. Police surrounded us from all sides. Helicopters above us. We were being hunted.
My fiance, former student and I held hands. We never resisted arrest. We laid down, police hands on the back of our heads pushing our faces into the concrete. We were zip-tied. A young Black girl I didn't know was pressed against the ground with an officer's knee on her neck. We were lined up against the wall. Stephanie and Ariana huddled next to me. I told them how much I loved them over and over again.
The police took me and stuck me in a tight van with two other young men, the heat blasting. Before they put me in, I asked the officer to please put my mask back on my face. He laughed. And then did it.
When I arrived at the police station, hardly any of the police wore masks. I saw one officer take a young, Black man by his neck and throw him to the ground. He pressed his face to the hard floor and yelled obscenities at him. The police were polite to me. A Black nurse checked my vitals and thanked me for wearing a Black Lives Matter shirt. They took all my possessions: phone, billfold and mask. I had to ask for another mask, which they supplied. I was processed and put into a cell. And that's when I experienced how our police act behind closed doors.
There were about 30 of us crammed into a cell. There was not enough sitting room for all of us. A couple of the young men did not receive masks. The cell was completely unsanitary; there were zero precautions in place to protect us (and thus the wider community) from the coronavirus — except for the masks most of us received at booking. None of us were read our rights or offered a phone call. An officer told us we would be out by 6:30 a.m.
Six-thirty came, and none of us received water or masks that some were missing. Many of the young men were bruised badly, bleeding and trading stories of what happened to them.
At some point in the morning, we received "breakfast." None of us received water throughout the night. Many people stopped wearing masks because "what's the point" when we're packed in so tight in unsanitary conditions. Many of the masks by this time were dirty just because of the conditions we were in. My mask remained on the whole time. I drank the lunchbox carton of milk they gave me and did not eat the rest. They offered us no soap, hand sanitizer or spoons for the dog-food-like cereal.
We were told we would be out around 9:30 a.m., but 9:30 a.m. came and went. Then we were told noon. Then 2 p.m. Then maybe some of us would get out today and some the next day. This was psychological abuse. The group of us were not offered water until about 4 p.m. The group I was with shared our stories, and we tried to be lights for each other. I was locked up with brave college students and young professionals. Overwhelmingly Black. We all were out doing the same thing, but charged with different "offenses."
I was charged with an unspecified misdemeanor while people of color faced more and harsher charges. We saw all the young women leaving their cell, and the officers told us they were being released from jail. I was finally released around 5:30 p.m. I didn't realize they lied about my fiancé and former student being released earlier. Stephanie was released at 9:30 p.m. And Ari was released at 3:30 a.m. The police refused to give me any information on them. I just had to wait for them outside the police headquarters.
How could I leave the love of my life and one of the most brilliant, compassionate students I've ever worked with? They were released in the middle of a war zone, where those commissioned to protect and serve were still terrorizing people on the streets who were demanding justice for Breonna and David.
Matthew Kaufmann is the 2020 Kentucky High School Teacher of the Year. He's currently teaching juniors and seniors at Marion C. Moore School in Jefferson County Public Schools. He's built an after-school coalition of students, teachers and community members around the mission of "empowering people to overcome institutional barriers and cultural propaganda that prevent self-actualization."
Your Turn
Matthew Kaufmann
Guest columnist
Your Turn
Matthew Kaufmann
Guest columnist
A state police officer fires a deterrent weapon at protesters May 31 on Broadway during the fourth night of protests in response to the death of Breonna Taylor at the hands of Louisville Metro Police.
$$$
