Leaders differ on how to slow gun violence
Kobin, Billy
02 Aug 2020
Reducing gun violence in Louisville is not a new dilemma for leaders, families and activists.
Community activist Christopher 2X said "totally eradicating" and preventing any shootings is a "fantasy," but trying to lessen the prevalence of gun-related crimes is possible.
"We cannot be afraid to tackle the issue once it's in sight and we can see the symptoms," he said. "We can't view it like, 'He'll grow out if it.' It's like a cancer. If it's not treated, it becomes terminal, and you can't reverse this attitude of becoming a shooter."
So far this year — through Sunday, July 26 — the city has had 79 criminal homicides and over 370 shootings, according to a Courier Journal review of Louisville Metro Police data.
All but seven of the homicides were fatal shootings.
The shootings have gone on despite the crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic and amid calls for justice in the death of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who was fatally shot by police during a raid at her apartment on March 13.
Every homicide case "stems from its own set of circumstances," such as "individual disputes, group or gang conflict, domestic issues and drug trafficking or use," police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said.
"One thing that most of our homicides have in common is a gun," she added. "We need more common-sense gun laws."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said things like background checks for private gun sales are needed to help stem the violence.
"Beyond that, we know that the challenges caused by the economic recession cause strain and tension for many, and bad decisions for some," he said. "That's one reason we are advocating for more federal COVID-19 assistance and locally, created the One Louisville COVID-19 Response Fund, to provide some stopgap funding for those who lost work because of the virus."
And as for whether mass protests and unrest over the Taylor shooting have made it harder for law enforcement to stop and solve these violent crimes, Halladay said public safety "is something we co-produce — community and police."
"We need residents to share information about what they know," Halladay said. "And that's obviously more difficult when trust is eroded."
Fischer also touched on "larger systemic issues that are the focus of protests on our streets right now — being marginalized for generations causes some to do desperate and dangerous things."
Fischer said the city must "provide equitable options for education, work, health care housing, and we need to create lasting community trust in our police."
The mayor added that the city continues to work with partners "on reimagining public safety" and attempting to fight "the root causes of inequity — poverty and racism."
"As I've said before, for our city to reach its full potential, we have to look at our history with open eyes and focused minds to create a more constructive way forward," he said. "For everyone."
Education also comes up when local advocates discuss how to turn the tide on gun violence.
A 2019 report from 2X's Game Changers organization titled, "Violence Impact on Children Learning," stresses that education, starting at the early childhood level, is the "key to ending gun violence and its devastating impact on kids learning."
Tod Moore, who works with youth through his New Day Ministries, also said he believes that a greater emphasis on education can help "pull up these kids and show them that ... you can break this generational curse and cycle you been living under for so long."
But Moore also said city officials deserve a fair amount of blame for letting the gun violence get out of hand.
As someone who grew up in Louisville public housing, Moore said efforts in recent years that the city has called "revitalization" projects are really just ongoing examples of redlining that have "shoved" people and "opposing gangs" into the same areas.
The protests over Taylor's death have once again brought up talk of broader issues and shown that many Louisvillians feel like "they are not being heard," Moore added.
"You can't have systemic racism and redlining," Moore said. "And have all this going on for decades and decades and not expect problems."
$$$
