Next interim chief vows access
Kachmar, Kala
30 Sep 2020
"... leading by example is the best thing I can do. I mean, I don't have lightning in a bottle, I will (give) officers and the community opportunities to have a dialogue so that they can kind of work through this and get the reconciliation started. But it all starts with truth for me."
Yvette Gentry
Next interim Louisville police chief
Louisville Metro Police's next interim chief says that after she's sworn in Thursday, she will take the boards off her office windows — literally and figuratively.
"This is my hand out to you to say you don't have to break anything to get to me," said Yvette Gentry, a former deputy chief who was tapped by Mayor Greg Fischer to lead the department while the city conducts a national search for a permanent chief.
"There are people who need access to me who don't feel like they've had access to me. And I think that's a part of the change that has to happen," Gentry told The Courier Journal during an interview in a room with plywood on the windows at LMPD headquarters Tuesday.
Gentry will be the first woman ever to lead Louisville's police department.
LMPD has been criticized locally and nationally for the death of Breonna Taylor and subsequent investigation, its handling of more than four months of protests and the city's record-high shootings and homicides. (The department has investigated more than 120 criminal homicides this year.)
Louisville protesters and police officers have had a variety of both peaceful and violent interactions since unrest started May 28 over the death of Taylor, a Black woman who was unarmed when she was shot by police during a failed drug raid at her apartment in March.
On June 1, shortly after then-Chief Steve Conrad announced he would retire at the end of the month, Fischer fired him after learning officers involved in the fatal shooting of West End barbecue owner David McAtee weren't wearing body cameras as they enforced a curfew.
And last month, interim Chief Robert Schroeder announced he would retire Oct. 1.
Gentry, who was born and raised in Louisville, retired from the department in 2014 after four years as deputy chief. She told The Courier Journal she plans to facilitate conversations to start mending the department and restoring public trust.
Accessibility, honesty and transparency are key to starting those conversations, she said. Gentry has already agreed to meet with some of people who have been live streaming the protests on social media — and said she will meet with anyone as long as they can agree to be respectful.
"I think people forget that there are police officers who want the same thing that the community wants," Gentry said. "We're ready to move in a direction ... where we're no longer screaming at each other, where we're talking to each other and figuring out what do we have to do to move forward because none of us can stay in this space much longer."
On top of tension between protesters and police that's been building for months, LMPD officers have been working long hours and under difficult conditions. River City Fraternal Order of Police President Ryan Nichols said this month that officers have felt unsupported by Fischer and city government.
The chief has to be accessible and communicative with officers too, Gentry said.
During a special Metro Council meeting about the department's handling of protests and the Taylor and McAtee cases on Monday, Schroeder testified that at times he had to go through the mayor's office before sending a message to his staff.
"And so you'll see a little bit of a different communication style; you'll see more of me," she said. "I'll be visible in a community, listening, talking, chatting. My officers will be with me."
She said she hopes the public is ready to move forward and find common ground.
"So leading by example is the best thing I can do. I mean, I don't have lightning in a bottle, I will (give) officers and the community opportunities to have a dialogue so that they can kind of work through this and get the reconciliation started. But it all starts with truth for me."
Kala Kachmar is an investigative reporter. Reach her at 502-582-4469; kkachmar@courierjournal.com or @NewsQuip on Twitter. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"... leading by example is the best thing I can do. I mean, I don't have lightning in a bottle, I will (give) officers and the community opportunities to have a dialogue so that they can kind of work through this and get the reconciliation started. But it all starts with truth for me."
Yvette Gentry
Next interim Louisville police chief
Yvette Gentry, the next interim Louisville police chief, says that accessibility, honesty and transparency are key to starting conversations to rebuild the public trust.
$$$
