Militias expected in town
Kenning, Chris
25 July 2020
Two opposing and heavily armed militias are expected to arrive in Louisville Saturday, threatening to raise volatility in a city wracked by months of protests over the fatal March police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
Louisville police plan downtown street closures and barricades to help separate members of NFAC (Not F***ing Around Coalition), an Atlanta-based Black militia, from those of far-right "Three Percenter" militia groups vowing to show up in response.
John "Grandmaster Jay" Johnson, founder of the NFAC, announced in a video that the group, which he said would be dressed in black with shotguns and semi-automatic rifles, would hold an armed formation to demand justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who was fatally shot as police served a search warrant.
That led a leader of a far-right militia called the III% Security Force, as well as Michael Malinconico, who also identifies as a "Three Percenter," to put out calls on social media for militia members to counter the NFAC and provide "security." Another member of a group called Wildcard III% has endorsed the call, Southern Poverty Law Center researchers said Friday.
Chris Hill, which the law center said is a leader of III% Security Force, this week posted a video on Facebook criticizing NFAC and saying that "all eyes" were on Louisville Saturday: 'I ain't f***ing around, neither. And I've got some hard-headed motherf***ers coming with me," he said.
On Friday he wrote, "Things are going to be crazy over the next few days ... Guns Up."
J.J. MacNab, an expert on extremism with George Washington University, tweeted on Friday that there is potential for volatility and that "protest/counterprotest tomorrow ... could be problematic."
Despite concerns, Louisville Metro Police Maj. Aubrey Gregory, the department's special operations commander, said this week that he expects peaceful protests and that the department would work so that both sides could safely express their views.
It's not known how many will show up from either group.
Johnson told Louisville city leaders last week that he estimates 5,000 to 6,000 members of the NFAC will come to Louisville. Roughly 1,000 NFAC members marched peacefully July 4 in Stone Mountain, Georgia, where there is a mountainside carving of Confederate leaders.
Three Percenter leaders did not respond to requests for comment.
They stirred controversy in late May when the local group's president, Terry Bush, hoisted an effigy of Gov. Andy Beshear from a tree at the Kentucky Capitol during a "Patriot Day 2nd Amendment Rally." That same militia also came to Louisville in July 2018 to counterprotest against a group demonstrating against President Donald Trump's immigration policies.
The Southern Poverty Law Center researchers say there isn't any solid confirmation of participation by other groups previously mentioned by police as having contacted them, including the Kentucky and Mississippi militias, Patriots for Reclamation and Kansas III%.
Louisville Metro Council President David James has said he worries that with both sides in town, if one person "does one stupid thing, and then we have a problem."
Police said the NFAC is expected to meet at Baxter Square Park at Jefferson Street and 11th and 12th streets at noon and march downtown to Jefferson Square Park. It's not yet known where the other militias plan to gather.
Louisville police will have a heightened presence in Jefferson Square Park and block off several roads downtown starting at 8 a.m. Saturday, and use Fifth Street as a "no-go zone" to keep the sides separate.
It comes as pressure builds on Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron as his office investigates the killing of Taylor, who was unarmed in her South End apartment when Louisville police shot her before 1 a.m. March 13.
Black Lives Matter activists are among those demanding that the officers be charged in the death. Cameron, who met electronically with the NFAC's Johnson earlier in the week, hasn't said when he'll make a determination.
Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@gannett.com or 502-396-3361. Reporter Ben Tobin contributed to this report.
$$$
