Fischer: Outside agency to review department
Tobin, Ben
04 June 2020
Following six straight nights of protests over the fatal shootings of an unarmed African American woman and a West End business owner, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer announced several initiatives regarding the city's police department Wednesday, including a "top-to-bottom" review.
The announcement came after Fischer fired LMPD Chief Steve Conrad on Monday and met with protesters Tuesday to hear their concerns.
Here are takeaways from what he said:
Outside group to review police Fischer said that in conjunction with Louisville Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess and interim LMPD Chief Rob Schroeder, the city is "issuing a request for proposal for a comprehensive, top-to-bottom review" of the department.
The review, to be conducted by an external, independent firm, will focus on a number of areas, including training, bias-free policing and accountability.
The firm also will identify obstacles to implementing changes to help the police department improve in various facets.
"This proposal requires a successful firm to conduct listening sessions to ensure substantial interactions with community members, interest groups, prosecutors, defense attorneys, police personnel, people that feel and that are most aggrieved by public safety activity," Fischer said.
He added that it's essential that residents "feel ownership in this process" and are part of the review.
The city's Fraternal Order of Police, which has had a contentious relationship with Fischer, expressed frustration with the mayor on Twitter following this announcement.
"Maybe @louisvillemayor should put out an RFP to review his corrupt administration that cares about NO ONE in this city," the River City FOP twitter account said in a now-deleted tweet. "@louisvillemayor may pretend to be compassionate, but he's allowing good people of all races and neighborhoods to be victimized by violent criminals.
"Last night as officers tried to respond to those calling for help, they were shot at, again and again," the police union wrote in a follow-up of another now-deleted tweet. "Police are here to help & WANT to help but cannot do that when they are vilified by their own mayor! More would trust us if they weren't being told not to by @louisvillemayor."
Nonprofit to run search for chief The Police Executive Research Forum will conduct the search for a new permanent chief to replace Conrad, who was fired Monday by the mayor.
"They understand the roles, responsibilities and experiences required of a successful law enforcement chief executive," Fischer said.
The city will also be working with the Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit to distribute a survey to residents so they can state their priorities in a new police chief, and there will be listening sessions as well.
Fischer fired Conrad after it was found that two officers involved in the fatal shooting of David McAtee, the owner of a popular West End barbecue business, failed to have body cameras on them during the incident, which came after a night of protests following a curfew enacted by the mayor.
Conrad was slated to retire at the end of the month after serving as chief since 2012.
Fischer said he has not read entire Breonna Taylor case file When asked by a Courier Journal reporter if he has read the Louisville Metro Police Department's entire case file for Taylor, who was shot and killed by police in her own apartment on March 13, Fischer said he had not.
"A case like this will have hundreds if not thousands of pages of documents (and) megabytes of video minutes," Fischer said. "It takes a long time to pull all this together, which is why it takes you two months, two and a half months to get there."
Fischer went on to say that with the case "substantially complete," he sent it over to Attorney General Daniel Cameron to review on May 20 because "I did not want it to be held up any longer."
"I think by the end of next week, we intend to have everything that we can with them, but that there's more than enough for investigation to begin, and I trust that's what Attorney General Cameron has been dealing with the case file for the last two weeks," Fischer said.
Cameron's office said it didn't have the full police investigation into Taylor's shooting — and an attorney for Taylor's family said Monday he was told the investigation into the officers' conduct could take two to three more months.
$$$
