U of L alumni form coalition to combat racism
EADENS, SAVANNAH
26 June 2020
"We just need to uplift the voices of everyone seeking a change so that we can collectively identify what we can do together and end the remaining vestiges of racism in Kentucky."
Terrence Sullivan
OJ Oleka followed the news intently on the first few nights of protests in late May as thousands of people took to the streets in Louisville and in cities across the U.S. to protest the police killings of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor, demanding justice for their deaths and calling attention to the systemic racism that permeates the country.
Oleka looked at his newborn daughter and wondered what the world will be like for her.
And then he texted an old college buddy: "We have to do something about this."
Oleka and Terrance Sullivan, who met more than a decade ago as undergrads at the University of Louisville, reconnected with their shared passion for social change.
Over the past few weeks, the pair has been busy in their free time — Sullivan just started a new position as executive director of the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights and Oleka works for the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities, advocating for public policy in higher education — forming AntiRacism Kentucky, a coalition that will develop bipartisan policy to help eliminate institutional racism within local and state government.
Oleka and Sullivan, who both have experience working for the Legislative Research Commission in Frankfort, began by sending out a survey asking for public input and interest on different social justice issues. From there, they plan to develop committees with experts and activists that will look at and address racism in every public sector, from agriculture and criminal justice to education, housing and health care.
Eventually, AntiRacism Kentucky will work with legislators in Frankfort to write, support and pass legislation to help address racism in the state.
"Racism is a plague on our society," Oleka said. "Anti-racism is not a partisan issue."
In a short span of time, the coalition has received interest from dozens of people with diverse backgrounds across the political spectrum, from white allies to Black attorneys to police officers, Oleka said.
He and Sullivan said they've been inspired by the Black Lives Matter protests, where people like Keturah Herron from the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky have been demonstrating every day but have also turned some of the rallying cries into action by helping spearhead the passage of "Breonna's Law" in Louisville, which bans no-knock police warrants.
"I think that is a perfect example of how tangible action and policy (can come) out of this greater movement, (and) we can use that to try to grow faith in policy as a lever to get some things done," said Sullivan, who also has a law degree from U of L. "But we need all of our skills at the table to usher in comprehensive change."
"And that is what we want to do with AntiRacism Kentucky," Sullivan added. "We want to channel the needs and direction in a multitude of areas of policy to inform policy ideas and do research on the efficacy of those thoughts, and ultimately pass them into law."
Oleka and Sullivan know they are just one piece in the larger puzzle of untangling systemic racism across Kentucky and the country.
"This is not to say we have all the ideas or are the only coalition to follow and participate in," Sullivan said. "We just need to uplift the voices of everyone seeking a change so that we can collectively identify what we can do together and end the remaining vestiges of racism in Kentucky."
And it's the right moment in history, Sullivan said, as people are seeking tangible change, from the removal of the Jefferson Davis statue in the state Capitol, to the Black Lives Matter protests in rural Kentucky towns.
"Throughout my school experience and through law school, I had many instances where my skin shifted the reality I faced," Sullivan said. "I vowed from a young age that I would do something to help people growing up with nothing like I did and try to work to enact change that helps lessen the injustices we face. I don't think policy is the only answer to issues around racism, it is just a tool in the greater toolbox we need to reach into to strive for change."
Savannah Eadens is a culture and diversity reporter for The Courier Journal. Reach Savannah at seadens@courierjournal.com, 502-381-9498 or on Twitter at @savannaheadens. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"We just need to uplift the voices of everyone seeking a change so that we can collectively identify what we can do together and end the remaining vestiges of racism in Kentucky."
Terrence Sullivan
Austin McAtee, a cousin of David McAtee, raises his hands into the air from atop a car as protesters head toward the Big Four Bridge on June 18.
$$$
