What speakers at DNC said about Breonna Taylor
Ramsey, Mary
22 Aug 2020
The national scope of the outrage over the death of Breonna Taylor was on full display throughout the four days of the Democratic National Convention, with numerous speakers invoking her name and the ongoing protests over the case and others like it.
Democratic vice presidential nominee Kamala Harris mentioned Taylor, a 26-year-old Black Louisville woman who was shot and killed by police in her home, in her speech accepting the nomination on the third night of the convention.
"There is no vaccine for racism. We have got to do the work for George Floyd, for Breonna Taylor," the California senator said. "For the lives of too many others to name. For our children."
Harris, a former prosecutor, called out "systematic racism" in her speech and connected it to this summer's protests over policing practices as well as the COVID-19 pandemic and its disproportionate impact on minority communities.
On Wednesday night she became the first Black woman in American history to be named to a major party's presidential ticket.
Her running mate, former Vice President Joe Biden, did not directly address the Taylor case in his acceptance speech, but he too said "systematic racism" is a major issue facing the country that he would address as president.
"History has thrust one more urgent task on us. Will we be the generation that finally wipes out the stain of racism from our national character?" he said. "I believe we're up to it."
Biden also shared the story of a conversation he had with the 6-year-old daughter of George Floyd, whose death in Minneapolis also fueled this summer's nationwide protests.
A moment of silence was held on the first night of the convention in memory of Floyd, whose brother also briefly addressed the convention.
In her Monday speech closing out the first night of the convention, former first lady Michelle Obama named Taylor as another on the long list of people of color who "continue to be murdered."
"And here at home, as George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and a never-ending list of innocent people of color continue to be murdered, stating the simple fact that a Black life matters is still met with derision from the nation's highest office," she said. "Because whenever we look to this White House for some leadership or consolation or any semblance of steadiness, what we get instead is chaos, division and a total and utter lack of empathy."
Her husband, former President Barack Obama, addressed the convention as well and acknowledged this summer's demonstrations for racial justice.
And declaring "Black lives matter," former Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton mentioned Taylor's death in her convention speech.
"Vote for justice for George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery," the former first lady, senator and secretary of state said. "Because Black lives matter."
$$$
