'I know we did the legal, moral and ethical thing,' says sergeant in shooting
Bullington, Jonathan
23 Sep 2020
A Louisville police sergeant said Tuesday he and other officers "did the legal, moral and ethical thing that night" when they fired their weapons while trying to search Breonna Taylor's apartment and killed her.
In a six-paragraph email he sent at 2:09 a.m. to more than 1,000 of his colleagues, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly also apologized to his fellow officers and their families and blamed Mayor Greg Fischer, Public Safety Chief Amy Hess and former Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad for failing "all of us in epic proportions for their own gain and to cover their asses."
"You DO NOT DESERVE to be in this position," wrote Mattingly, who was shot during the Taylor search on March 13. "The position that allows thugs to get in your face and yell, curse and degrade you. Throw bricks bottles and urine on you and expect you to do nothing."
He also warned the department and the FBI, which he said "aren't cops and would piss their pants if they had to hold the line," would open civil rights investigations against officers for making a mistake during a stressful time.
"Your civil rights mean nothing," he wrote, "but the criminal has total autonomy."
The email was first reported on Twitter by Vice News correspondent Roberto Aram Ferdman. Kent Wicker, an attorney for Mattingly, confirmed to The Courier Journal that his client sent the email.
"Sgt. Mattingly sent an email to his colleagues last evening expressing his support for them and their work in these difficult times," Wicker said. "As you know, he was shot and severely wounded during the serving of this search warrant. Like our entire community, he is hopeful this process moves forward quickly and that his fellow officers and the people of Louisville remain safe."
Fischer's office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
During a press conference Tuesday morning to discuss police barricades in downtown Louisville, LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said talking about the email is "premature."
"It's something developing, so we'll have something out later," he said.
An LMPD spokesman said the department did not release the email but is aware of it "and the matter is under review."
Sam Aguiar, one of the attorneys for Taylor's family, called the email another example of the problems within the city's police department.
"An unarmed Black woman whose home never should've been raided was shot (five) times and died at the hands of Mattingly and his colleagues," Aguiar said.
"Mattingly gets to go home to his family every day. Then they covered it up. So, respectfully, Mattingly's definition of 'moral' and 'ethical' actions are insulting to anyone with common decency. His characterization of protesters as 'thugs' is reprehensible. This department has instilled a culture which needs to be changed."
Mattingly is one of three officers, along with detectives Myles Cosgrove and Brett Hankison, who fired their weapons while trying to serve a search warrant on Taylor's apartment in the early hours of March 13.
Taylor was killed by police during the raid that went awry, while Mattingly, a 20-year veteran of the force, was shot in the thigh and required surgery.
Taylor's death has sparked widespread outrage and daily protests calling for racial justice and for the officers involved in her killing to face criminal charges.
While Mattingly and Cosgrove remain on administrative leave, Hankison was fired in June. He is contesting the decision.
The case, meanwhile, is the subject of a criminal investigation by Attorney General Daniel Cameron's office, a civil rights investigation by the FBI and an internal LMPD investigation.
The attorney general's decision could come any time, and Fischer has declared a state of emergency to prepare for a possibly violent reaction.
"Regardless of the outcome today or Wednesday, I know we did the legal, moral and ethical thing that night," Mattingly wrote to his colleagues. "It's sad how the good guys are demonized, and the criminals are canonized."
"I wish I were there with you leading the charge," he said in closing. "I'll be praying for your safety. Remember you are just a pawn in the Mayors political game. I'm proof they do not care about you or your family, and you are replaceable. Stay safe and do the right thing. YOU ARE LOVED AND SUPPORTED by most of the community. Now go be the Warriors you are, but please be safe! None of these 'peaceful' protesters are worth your career or freedom. God speed boys and girls."
Reporter Darcy Costello contributed to this story. Jonathan Bullington is an investigative reporter. Reach him at: 502-582-4241; JBullington@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @jrbullington. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly's email
LMPD Family,
I'm not here to give you a Rah Rah you got this speech. I'm not here to tell you that you signed up to help this community and to keep your head up. I'm here to tell you I'm sorry you have to go through this. I'm sorry your families have to go through this. I'm sorry the Mayor, Amy Hess and Chief Conrad failed all of us in epic proportions for their own gain and to cover their asses.
You DO NOT DESERVE to be in this position. The position that allows thugs to get in your face and yell, curse and degrade you. Throw bricks, bottles and urine on you and expect you to do nothing. It goes against EVERYTHING we were all taught in the academy. The position that if you make a mistake during one of the most stressful times in your career, the department and FBI (who aren't cops and would piss their pants if they had to hold the line) go after you for civil rights violations. Your civil rights mean nothing, but the criminal has total autonomy.
We all signed up to be police officers. We knew the risks and were willing to take them, but we always assumed the city had your back. We wanted To do the right thing in the midst of an evil world to protect those who cannot protect themselves. To enforce laws that make it possible to live in a peaceful society. We as police DO NOT CARE if you are black, white, Hispanic, Asian, what you identify as ... this week. We aren't better than anyone. This is not an us against society, but it is good versus evil. We are sons, daughters, husbands, wives, parters (sic), brothers, sisters, dads and moms. We are human beings with flaws, feelings and emotions.
Now I'm just rambling, but I want you to know that I'm still proud to be a cop. To be an LMPD cop. No matter the ineptitude in upper command or the mayors office, this is one of the greatest jobs on earth. With that being said these next few days are going to be tough. They are going to be long, they are going to be frustrating. They will put a tremendous amount of stress on your families. Do not let your ego get you in a trick bag. Have your partners 6. De escalate if possible. DO NOT give the pencil pushers at the top, you know the ones who are too scared to hold the line, a reason to open investigations on you. The same ones that couldn't make decisions to save their lives. We need leaders that lead from the front and not in a room under a desk. Do what you need to do to go home you (sic) your family. Just do it with dignity and make sure you can justify your actions because everything down there is recorded.
I don't know a lot of you guys/gals but I've felt the love. Regardless of the outcome today or Wednesday, I know we did the legal, moral and ethical thing that night. It's sad how the good guys are demonized, and criminals are canonized. Put that aside for a while, keep your focus and do your jobs that you are trained and capable of doing. Don't put up with their shit, and go home to those lovely families and relationships.
I wish I were there with you leading the charge. I'll be praying for your safety. Remember you are just a pawn in the Mayors political game. I'm proof they do not care about you or your family, and you are replaceable. Stay safe and do the right thing. YOU ARE LOVED AND SUPPORTED by most of the community. Now go be the Warriors you are, but please be safe! None of these "peaceful" protesters are worth your career or freedom. God speed boys and girls.
Sgt. John Mattingly
A police officer holds a baton in May as the deaths of Louisville's Breonna Taylor and Minneapolis' George Floyd at the hands of police spurred protests.
$$$
