Leading by example
Kim, David J
20 June 2020
David Jones' message to fellow coaches was about a minute long, but it was direct. Football coaches don't just teach the sport. They have the power to influence players beyond the gridiron.
"We always coach football players, and now it's time for us to coach lives," he said. "We have power as coaches to teach the youth."
Jones' message pierced through the peaceful protests at Jefferson Square Park. It's a three-hour drive round-trip from Paris, Kentucky, to Louisville, but he said he wanted to bring awareness and do his part on Friday, Juneteenth.
Jones, head coach at Bourbon County High School and a former defensive back at Kentucky, was one of 16 Black high school football coaches across Kentucky who gathered in downtown Louisville. Part of the Minority Coaches Association of Kentucky, they marched from Louisville Gardens to Jefferson Square Park. They finished with a prayer at the Louisville Metro Hall, asking for equality and change.
"This is a time that if you're coaching football, you're coaching kids that are minorities," said DeSales assistant coach Ty Scroggins, who organized the event. "You're going to have to be able to have those conversations with those kids some time throughout the season."
Scroggins formed the Minority Coaches Association of Kentucky in March before the coronavirus pandemic hit.
Initially, the group was formed for "upcoming minority coaches in Louisville that (were) new and they had no idea to be a head coach. I wanted to get back to them and show them the ropes, what to do, what not do as a head coach," Scroggins said.
The word spread throughout Kentucky and minority coaches across the commonwealth showed interest in joining. It culminated on Juneteenth in downtown Louisville. Scroggins said he wanted to show support for his former players, some of whom are protesters and some of whom are police officers, and hopes Friday's gathering will lead to the association's growth.
"I wanted to honor and be part of what's going on right now," Ballard head coach Adrian Morton said. "Being able to support fellow coaches and brothers."
Coaches first convened at the Louisville Gardens at 4 p.m. and walked north on Armory Place to Jefferson Square Park, where they were greeted by hundreds of protesters and signs honoring Breonna Taylor, a Black woman who was fatally shot by police officers in her apartment.
At the intersection of 6th and Jefferson, Coaches LaKunta Farmer of Ballard, Kenny Davidson of South Warren, Jones and Scroggins each shared a message that ranged from teaching the youth the right way, preaching the right message, the importance of Juneteenth and others.
"I wanted to stand in solidarity with my brothers for equality and the country," Davidson said. "It was very surreal seeing solidarity (among) different demographics out here peacefully protesting."
After walking the downtown together, they returned to Jefferson Square Park for a group photo and a prayer.
"I think people see us out here and they're seeing us trying to do positive things," Scroggins said. "Black kids, white kids, we coach them all. We just got to make them try to realize right from the wrong and the decisions they make and that could affect you, your family, your team."
David J. Kim: DKim@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @_DavidJKim. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Sixteen high school football coaches gather at the corner of 6th and Jefferson streets on Friday. The coaches are part of a Minority Coaches Association of Kentucky who decided to come together on Juneteenth to march to Jefferson Square and around downtown Louisville.
$$$
