Years of distrust toward LMPD
Wolfson, Andrew
28 June 2020
When 50-year-old James Taylor was shot and killed by police in 2002 with his arms handcuffed behind his back, his mother said it was "as wrong as two left shoes."
But only a couple of hundred protesters marched in front of Louisville police headquarters.
Fast forward 18 years.
Twenty-six-year-old Breonna Taylor is shot dead in her apartment by police in a volley of gunfire during the execution of a search warrant.
Thousands of people, young, old, Black and white – take to the streets, night after night. A few resort to violence. Hundreds chant, "No justice. No peace."
Why the difference?
Just hours before Chief Steve Conrad was fired June 1, he offered his own assessment.
"I think it is very, very clear that many people do not trust police," he said.
Activists, community leaders and African American attorneys say he's right.
They say the demonstrations in Louisville over the past two weeks were the culmination of local grievances going back decades – and the deaths of African Americans nationwide at the hands of officers in recent years.
First, there was Eric Garner. Police in New York in July 2014 sat on his head and pinned him to the ground on a sidewalk as a cell phone video captured his final words: "I can't breathe."
Then a Missouri grand jury declined to indict a white police officer for the shooting death of 17-year-old Michael Brown in Ferguson.
And later the same year, police shot and killed Tamir Rice, a 12-year-old boy, in a Cleveland park while he was carrying a toy gun.
Intensifying outrage over police treatment of Black people, the next year 28-year-old Sandra Bland was stopped for a minor traffic violation by a Texas state trooper, threatened with a stun gun and charged with assaulting an officer.
She took her own life three days later in jail.
And in 2018, further fueling suspicion and outrage, Botham Jean, a 26-year-old African American accountant, was shot and killed in his apartment by an off-duty white officer who thought it was her apartment and that Jean was a burglar.
This year, just three weeks before police killed Breonna Taylor in her South End apartment, Ahmaud Arbery, an unarmed 25-year old Black man, was shot while jogging in Glynn County, Georgia, allegedly by two men, one a former police officer and the other his son.
Then, finally, on May 25, convulsing the nation, an officer in Minneapolis kneeled on the back of George Floyd's neck for 8 minutes and 46 seconds as he lay handcuffed face down and cried "mama" and "I can't breathe.'"
He died of cardiac arrest and the officer, Derek Chauvin, was charged with second-degree murder. Three other officers also were charged for failing to intervene.
'The straw that broke the camel's back' In interviews, Louisville activists said that while the previous police shootings figured in the reaction here, Floyd's death triggered the protests, which didn't begin for more than a month after Taylor's death.
"It was the straw that broke the camel's back," said Carla Wallace, who heads the Louisville chapter of Showing Up for Racial Justice.
Professor Ricky Jones, chairman of the University of Louisville's Department of Pan-African Studies, and a freelance columnist for The Courier Journal, said Floyd's death was the "tipping point" for Louisville and the nation.
They and others say Taylor's March 13 death galvanized Louisville because she was shot in her home, after getting out of bed, and because she was seen as an innocent victim.
James Taylor, in contrast, was smoking crack cocaine with friends in his Smoketown apartment when police went there to answer a trouble call. They claimed he grabbed a box-cutting knife and managed to twist it around to his hip, then threaten them with it when they shot him.
No officers were charged.
Protesters say Taylor's death also resonated because police charged her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, with attempted murder and assault for firing one shot that hit an officer in the leg.
Police returned fire, killing Taylor in her hallway. Walker has maintained that he thought intruders were breaking in, and the charges have been dismissed pending further investigation.
The protests also drew large numbers of millennials, including white people, whose political views and activism were shaped by the Black Lives Matter movement coming out of Ferguson, Wallace said.
Activists say the protests may have swelled because so many people are out of work and out of school because of the coronavirus pandemic – and they were tired of being stuck at home.
"I think we are seeing a different racial dynamic among young people, who are risking their lives during pandemic rather than partying or going to the beach," Jones said.
Two different standards of justice He and others say the distrust of police cited by Conrad is hardly new, nor is it confined to Louisville.
"Black communities nationwide think they have been persecuted by police for decades, while whites have been protected," Jones said.
But he and others say the resentment arises from factors that are uniquely local, and occasionally have been overt.
Two years ago, for example, Todd Shaw, an assistant police chief in Prospect who had served on the Louisville force for 20 years, was revealed to have told a recruit that if he encountered Black suspects smoking marijuana, "shoot them."
Shaw was fired.
Black residents in Louisville also have been occasionally subjected to excessive force, like Nyshan Beckham, whom Officer Greg Satterly shot with a Taser in 2016 even though she was on the ground with her hands behind her back.
Satterly, who later threw two handcuffed people to the ground, was fired last year.
In another incident that could have ended tragically, 14 SWAT team officers last October raided the West Chestnut Street home of a Black couple with three children, smashing through the front door, using explosive devices and holding the family at gunpoint.
Police were looking for a man and woman suspected of growing and selling marijuana who did not live at the address, according to a lawsuit filed in October 2019 in Jefferson Circuit Court by Ashlea Burr and Mario Daugherty.
Black residents of Louisville also have bridled under enforcement that they sensed was disproportionately aimed at them.
The Courier Journal reported last year that African Americans were more than three times likely to be searched after traffic stops than whites, and six times more likely to be cited for possession of marijuana.
African Americans comprise less than one-fourth of Louisville's population, yet they accounted for two-thirds of those charged with marijuana possession – a disparity so great that County Attorney Mike O'Connell announced he was going to stop prosecuting small possession charges.
African Americans also have been fatally shot by police in Louisville in disproportionate numbers: In the 15 years ending in 2019, Louisville Metro Police fatally shot 34 people, 15 of whom (44%) were Black.
Driving while Black in Louisville The police department's practice of stopping Black motorists on pretexts to search for guns and drugs was exposed for the world to see on a video viewed by more than 1 million people.
It showed a Black teen with no criminal record stopped for making a "wide turn," then pulled from his car, frisked and handcuffed while police scoured his car with a drug-sniffing dog in a fruitless search for contraband.
Meanwhile, 18-year-old Tae-Ahn Lea was forced to stand on the street, embarrassed, as traffic drove by, with the cuffs chafing his wrists, as one officer asked him, "Why do you have this negative view towards the police?"
"People have a legitimate reason to distrust the police," said Brandon Lawrence, an African-American attorney who bills himself as the "lawyer for the city."
Jan Waddell, another lawyer who is Black, said African Americans in Louisville have also been wrongly targeted for crimes, including four young men he represented who were dubbed the "Misidentified Four."
The men, cousins with no criminal records, were the first African Americans a white officer came upon on during a night of violence in Louisville in 2014 after a woman claimed she'd been robbed at gunpoint by four Black men in hoodies.
Using discredited eyewitness identification techniques, the officer falsely charged them with the crime.
They were eventually exonerated and given a $1.5 million settlement by the city – and an apology from Mayor Greg Fischer – but not before they were jailed, one for 70 days.
Three other African Americans – William Gregory, Edwin Chandler and Kerry Porter – spent a combined 27 years in prison for murders and rapes they did not commit because of corrupt, negligent and incompetent police work by Louisville officers.
"Every Black person, regardless of class, feels police look at every Black person as a suspect," Jones said. "And that is exhausting."
He said the vehemence of the protests over Breonna Taylor's death was inevitable, given the circumstances in Louisville and across the nation.
"It was not a question of if, just when," he said.
"The surprising thing is that people are surprised."
Andrew Wolfson: 502-582-7189; awolfson@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @adwolfson. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/andreww.
A small group of demonstrators protests the shooting of James Taylor, who was killed by an officer after police cuffed him with his hands behind his back.
Michael Hayman/Courier Journal file
A lone protester makes her way to a demonstration in 2002 over the shooting of James Taylor by police. They had handcuffed him with his hands behind his back.
MARY ANN lyons/Courier Journal file
Tae-Ahn Lea is taken out of the car after being pulled over by LMPD for an illegal turn in August of 2018.
$$$
