Timeline of the 180-plus days since Breonna Taylor's death
Duvall, Tessa
13 Sep 2020
It's been 184 days and counting.
That how long the family and friends of Breonna Taylor, who was fatally shot by Louisville Metro Police officers in her apartment March 13, have been agonizingly waiting for the wheels of justice to dispense a decision in Taylor's death.
And the rest of Louisville has been anxiously waiting with them.
Will the three LMPD officers who shot her be charged in her death?
What will happen to Louisville as a result?
As we wait for Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron to announce whether criminal charges will be filed in Taylor's death, we look back at the tumultuous events that brought us to this moment.
Here's how we got here:
March 12, 2020: Detective Joshua Jaynes, an officer in the Place-Based Investigations unit of the Criminal Interdiction Division, receives authorization for five no-knock search warrants from Circuit Judge Mary Shaw for the unit's narcotics investigation, including Breonna Taylor's apartment on Springfield Drive.
March 13: At 12:40 a.m., officers execute the warrant at Taylor's apartment, knocking on the door. Police say they identified themselves, but Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who is inside, says he didn't hear them. When officers knock in the door, Walker fires a shot, which police say hit Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. He and two other officers return fire, hitting Taylor five times and killing her in her hallway.
Walker is arrested and charged with the attempted murder of a police officer and assault.
Police later identify Mattingly and detectives Myles Cosgrove and Brett Hankison as the officers who fired their weapons, placing them on administrative reassignment.
March 19: Taylor's family holds a vigil for her in downtown Louisville. Dozens of her friends and family attend.
March 25: Twelve days after Taylor died, Mattingly is interviewed for 40 minutes by the LMPD's Public Integrity Unit about the events of that night.
March 27: Jefferson Circuit Judge Olu Stevens releases Walker on home incarceration, invoking the ire of the local Fraternal Order of Police, with Lodge 614 President Ryan Nichols calling the move "a slap in the face to everyone wearing a badge." Rob Eggert, Walker's defense attorney, says it is the police who killed Taylor who are "the threat to the community."
April 22: The Place-Based Investigations unit executes another no-knock search warrant at 2424 Elliott Ave., one of the homes police searched the night Taylor died, again recovering drugs and cash. The home is frequented by Taylor's ex-boyfriend, Jamarcus Glover, who was arrested March 13.
April 27: Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, sues Hankison, Cosgrove and Mattingly, the three officers who fired shots in Taylor's apartment. Local attorneys Sam Aguiar and Lonita Baker, who represent the family, say police used excessive force and were grossly negligent.
May 11: Ben Crump, a Florida-based attorney with a track record of working with families of high-profile slain Black Americans, announces he's joining Taylor's family's legal team on the heels of representing the family of Ahmaud Arbery, a Black jogger who was killed by white men in Georgia.
May 13: Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine announces he is recusing himself from reviewing Louisville police officers' conduct in Taylor's death, saying it is a conflict of interest because he is pursuing a case against Walker for allegedly shooting Mattingly. Instead, Cameron's office will act as the special prosecutor in the case.
May 18: Mayor Greg Fischer announces that the police chief or his designee must sign off on all no-knock search warrant requests before asking a judge for approval. Fischer also says all sworn officers must wear and use body cameras when serving warrants or in any situation in which they will identify themselves as police officers.
May 20: Fischer announces LMPD has turned over the findings of an internal investigation into Taylor's death to Cameron's office.
May 21: The FBI announces it is launching an investigation into Taylor's death.
May 21: In a motion to dismiss Walker's criminal charges, Eggert, his defense attorney, provides a recording showing that LMPD Sgt. Amanda Seelye never told a grand jury that Walker said he didn't know he was shooting at police March 13, nor that Taylor was killed when police returned fire. Police Chief Steve Conrad announces that he will retire at the end of June and Deputy Chief Robert Schroeder will step in in the interim.
May 22: Wine announces that he will dismiss all charges against Walker, saying "additional investigation is necessary."
May 25: More than 700 miles away, in Minneapolis, George Floyd is killed by police Officer Derek Chauvin, who kneeled on his neck as Floyd gasped that he couldn't breathe. Floyd's death would ignite racial justice protests across the country.
May 26: The Courier Journal sues LMPD, seeking the immediate release of the department's investigative file into Taylor's death.
May 28: The Courier Journal publishes Walker's frantic call to 911 minutes after police fatally shot Taylor in her apartment. More than an hour later, the city releases Walker's call, as well as more than a dozen more calls from neighbors and police the night of the shooting. Protests begin in Louisville, with calls for the officers in Taylor's shooting to be fired and criminally charged. They erupt into clashes between protesters and police, who use tear gas and pepper balls. An unknown assailant shoots at least seven people during the protests.
May 29: Fischer announces he is suspending no-knock search warrants like the one issued to enter Taylor's apartment, telling protesters, "I hear you." Fischer also says a civilian review board to examine police shootings should have subpoena powers.
A second night of protests ensues, with some looting.
May 30: Taylor's younger sister, Juniyah Palmer, takes to social media to plead for peace: "Once y'all started vandalism, you took my sister's name out of place!" Later that morning, Fischer announces he is implementing a dusk-til-dawn curfew, and Gov. Andy Beshear sends in the National Guard.
June 1: LMPD and National Guard members go to 26th and Broadway to break up a crowd after curfew. David McAtee, 53, the owner of a popular barbecue stand, dies in the ensuing encounter, fatally shot by the National Guard. Before the day's end, Fischer fires Conrad after learning the police officers at McAtee's fatal shooting did not have their body cameras turned on.
June 2: Fischer addresses protesters in person, trying to explain to the crowd why he can't immediately fire the officers in Taylor's death. He is met with chants of "No justice, no peace."
June 3: Fischer orders a "top-to-bottom" review of Louisville Metro Police and announces that a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit will help in the national search for a new police chief. Dozens of LMPD officers walk out on Fischer in protest during a roll call.
June 5: A crowd of at least 1,000 gather on what would have been Taylor's 27th birthday. The massive demonstrations envelop Metro Hall downtown and culminate with protest marches around the city.
June 8: The statue of John B. Castleman, a Confederate major turned Abraham Lincoln supporter, is removed from Louisville's Cherokee Triangle after 107 years.
June 9: Hankison, one of the officers who fired weapons in Taylor's apartment, is accused of sexual assault by multiple women, The Courier Journal reports. The police department confirms it is looking into the allegations.
June 10: Interim Chief Schroeder announces that police officers won't be allowed to use tear gas without his or his designee's approval. Jaynes, the detective who sought the no-knock search warrant for Taylor's home, is placed on administrative reassignment to investigate the warrant he obtained.
June 11: U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, a Kentucky Republican, puts forth proposal to ban no-knock search warrants nationwide, naming it in honor of Taylor.
June 12: Fischer signs "Breonna's Law," banning no-knock search warrants in Louisville. The Metro Council unanimously passed the ordinance the night before.
June 13: Workers remove the marble statue of Confederate president and Kentucky native Jefferson Davis from the state Capitol, where it had stood for 84 years.
June 23: Hankison is officially fired as an LMPD officer after he is accused of "blindly" firing 10 rounds into Taylor's apartment and the unit next door. Schroeder adds in a termination letter that Hankison showed "extreme indifference to the value of human life."
June 24: Hankison appeals his firing, with his attorney, David Leightty, calling the dismissal a "cowardly political act."
June 25: Hundreds of people rally on the steps of the Kentucky Capitol in Frankfort, demanding justice for Taylor and other Black women. Celebrities, including Jada Pinkett Smith and the hip-hop artist Common, show their support.
June 27: Tyler Gerth, a 27-year-old photographer and supporter of the Black Lives Matter movement, is shot and killed in Jefferson Square Park. His godfather is Joe Gerth, a Courier Journal columnist. Steven Lopez, 23, is arrested and charged with murder and first-degree wanton endangerment.
June 29: Metro Council officials announce their intent to launch an investigation into how Fischer's administration handled the Taylor and McAtee shooting deaths.
Protesters block all three lanes of the Clark Memorial Bridge, which connects Louisville and Southern Indiana, for several hours, leading to 43 arrests and 20 cars towed.
July 5: In a revised lawsuit, attorneys for Taylor's family allege that LMPD was targeting a suspected drug house on Elliott Avenue and Taylor's ex-boyfriend as a part of a larger effort to clear out the Russell neighborhood for gentrification. The mayor's office called the allegations "outrageous."
July 13: Cameron states that he still has no timeline for the investigation into Taylor's death, and praises Fischer's decision a day earlier not to turn over "all documents" in Taylor's case to the Metro Council.
July 14: More than 100 protesters march to Cameron's home in Louisville's East End, demanding charges against the officers responsible for Taylor's death. Police arrest 87 people – including an NFL player and reality TV stars – and charge them all with a felony. (Felony charges were later dismissed.)
July 24: More than 100 protesters gathered in Louisville's NuLu neighborhood, blocking Market Street and setting up a block party in the road. Police arrest 76 people.
July 25: Two opposing, heavily armed militia groups converge on downtown Louisville. More than 300 members of the Atlanta-based Black militia NFAC, or "Not F***ing Around Coalition" come to support the Taylor protests, while a smaller group of 50 far-right "Three Percenter" militia members show up to back police. Three people are injured when a NFAC member accidentally discharges their weapon in Baxter Park.
July 27: The American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky and the NAACP Legal Defense fund file a federal lawsuit against LMPD, saying the department has repeatedly used force and intimidation against peaceful protesters demanding justice for Taylor.
July 30: Oprah Winfrey announces she will give up the cover of her magazine for the first time, ceding it to Taylor's image. It is the first time in 20 years that Winfrey is not on the cover.
Aug. 3: The Metro Council committee investigating Fischer's handling of Taylor's case and ensuing protests authorizes its first subpoenas after administration officials declined to testify in open session.
Aug. 6: Cameron tells The Courier Journal that his office is waiting for information on ballistics tests being done by the FBI.
Aug. 13: On the five-month anniversary of her daughter's death, Tamika Palmer speaks out, saying the movement has become "bigger than Breonna."
Aug. 16: State Rep. Attica Scott, D-Louisville, announces she has proposed a bill to ban no-knock search warrants across Kentucky.
Aug. 17: Republicans on Metro Council call for a no-confidence vote in Fischer, saying he has "chosen to prevent" his staff from participating in hearings about his response to Taylor's death and ensuing protests.
Aug. 22: New York-based social justice group Until Freedom launches BreonnaCon, a four-day event in Louisville aimed to draw attention to Taylor's death.
Aug. 25: The Courier Journal first publishes findings from a leaked LMPD report compiled after Taylor's death that highlights her connections to Glover, her ex-boyfriend and a convicted drug trafficker.
Aug. 26: Upset at the leaked LMPD report that he feels tries to blame him for Taylor's death, Glover talks exclusively to The Courier Journal, saying Taylor never had any connections to illegal drug sales.
Aug. 30: Cameron announces he has received the FBI's ballistics results in the Taylor case.
Aug. 31: Wine disputes that Glover was ever offered a plea deal to name Taylor as a co-defendant in his criminal case after a social media post pictures a document Glover said he was asked to sign. Wine says it was a draft. A July 21 offer, later rescinded, doesn't name Taylor but did ask Glover to confirm that her apartment was used to "store proceeds from the trafficking operation."
Sept. 1: Walker sues LMPD, saying he is a victim of police misconduct and seeking immunity from prosecution for the shot that allegedly wounded Mattingly. He says in a statement that the charges were "meant to silence me and cover up Breonna's murder."
Sept. 2: Democratic presidential nominee and former Vice President Joe Biden says the police officers who shot Taylor should be criminally charged.
Sept. 4: The protests demanding justice for Taylor reach their 100th consecutive day in Louisville.
Sept. 5: Hundreds of people protest outside of Churchill Downs during the 146th running of the Kentucky Derby, chanting "No justice, no Derby!" Their efforts to stop the horse race were unsuccessful.
Sept. 8: A Jefferson County judge rules that officials in Fischer's administration must testify publicly in Metro Council's investigation into the Taylor and McAtee cases.
$$$
