'Say her name'
Kachmar, Kala
30 May 2020
The city remained on edge Friday after protests turned violent the night before, leaving seven wounded by gunfire and a wake of property damage in downtown Louisville.
Louisville Metro Police and Mayor Greg Fischer said they were preparing for additional street protests Friday night and called for calm.
By 9 p.m., more than 1,000 protesters had gathered in downtown, blocking traffic in some intersections. The crowd was chanting "F-- the police," and some had set the U.S. and Kentucky flags on fire at the Hall of Justice. Kentucky State Police officers arrived to assist LMPD for the night and throughout the weekend.
Protesters demanded justice for Breonna Taylor, 26, the unarmed black woman fatally shot by LMPD officers who broke down her door while executing a no-knock search warrant for her southwest Louisville apartment in March.
Thursday's rally began peacefully at around 7 p.m., just hours after the city released 911 tapes from the night of Taylor's death.
"I don't know what is happening. Somebody kicked in the door and shot my girlfriend," Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, tearfully told dispatchers in the recording.
An estimated 500 people marched downtown, chanting Taylor's name and calling for criminal charges against the three officers involved in her death.
Early on, large crowds chanted: "No justice! No peace! Prosecute the police!"
"Say her name!" yelled Chanelle Helm, a leader for Black Lives Matter Louisville.
"Breonna!" the crowd called in return.
But by sunset, anger started boiling over. The violence escalated quickly.
Windows were broken, bricks were thrown into buildings, garbage cans were set on fire and cars were damaged.
Eventually, shots rang out from the crowd.
"Louisville will not tolerate violence," Fischer said in an address Friday afternoon. "And we will protect our city and our residents from any attempts of violence or property damage."
So far, three protesters from Thursday night have been arrested.
LMPD arrested and charged an Owensboro resident, 25-year-old Adair Henderson, with disorderly conduct and failure to disperse, according to an arrest citation.
Stephanie Garvin and David Wheatley, both of Louisville, were also booked into Metro Corrections about 2 a.m. Friday and each charged with first-degree criminal mischief and first-degree riot, court records show.
"Again, our goal will be to allow for the peaceful expression of protest. We value the right to free speech and understand this community has a lot to say right now," a statement from LMPD said Friday.
No lives were lost during Thursday's protests, but seven were wounded by gunfire. Two victims required surgery, and both are now in stable condition.
Two officers were taken to the hospital for chest pains "spurred" by the event. One was hospitalized overnight and has since been released, according to LMPD.
"We must find a way to stop this cycle of injustice," Fischer said. "The violence and the demonstration and the disruption that we saw last night will not get us there."
Fischer urged parents to keep children home on Friday night, and told people to stay away from downtown unless they're planning to protest.
Early Friday, Fischer first posted about the riots on social media along with a message from Taylor's family thanking protesters for giving her a voice but asking for peace.
"Emotions are high," he wrote. "Let's work toward justice."
The clash, the damage By 10 p.m. Thursday, at least one group could be seen verbally clashing with police officers near the Yum Center.
When one officer was surrounded by protesters near Bearno's by the Bridge, a pizza parlor near the Second Street Bridge and the Yum Center, protest organizers stepped in to make sure the officer was not harmed.
Just after 11 p.m., LMPD officers dispersed a large crowd of protesters on East Main Street. Shortly after, hundreds of protesters gathered outside Metro Hall and clashed with officers, who were dressed in body armor and face shields and were carrying batons.
Protesters threw bottles and other objects at police. They kicked and damaged patrol cars. They slashed the tires and tried to topple an armored vehicle. Shots were fired into several buildings, including the courthouse and LMPD headquarters, police said.
LMPD said its officers did not discharge a weapon Thursday night. Once the shots came from the crowd near Metro Hall, officers employed the use of smoke grenades, tear gas and pepper balls, which are similar to paintballs and leave welts on the body, an LMPD spokesman said in a statement.
Protesters at the statue of King Louis XVI near Sixth and Jefferson tore off his hand. Video shows the hand of the statue being passed through the crowd.
Police said graffiti was painted in several places, including a firefighter memorial.
A statement from Berl Perdue, president of Kentucky's Fraternal Order of Police, said Friday it was "unacceptable" that officers were told to stand down while faced with danger from protesters.
"The County Jail was assaulted with bricks, rocks and even bullets," he said. "Metro Corrections had to activate their tactical team in an effort to safeguard the inmates and corrections officers."
Perdue also said traffic was blocked and citizens were trapped in their cars.
Fischer said there's been no estimate for the damage yet, but it's "not a huge amount."
One protester, Haley Meland, 23, a white woman, said she was at the protest to "use our voice" for people who couldn't.
And while "holding up a heart sign" in front of police, she was hit several times with pepper balls that left blackening bruises. "We came with voices, they came with bats and guns, which is always the problem," Meland said of the police in riot gear.
"At this point, it's become so cyclical that it's, like, how can you not use your voice?" she said of the actions of white police officers against black citizens.
Investigating Taylor's death Local officials have been under pressure in recent weeks to determine what went wrong during the execution of the no-knock warrant that resulted in Taylor's death on March 13.
One of the three undercover narcotics officers, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, was shot in the leg upon entering the apartment, but survived. Walker, Taylor's boyfriend, has said police didn't announce themselves when they busted through the door.
Taylor's death has sparked questions from family members and activists, including the Kentucky chapters of the NAACP and the American Civil Liberties Union. Taylor's family filed a federal lawsuit against LMPD for her wrongful death.
Fischer told the public on Friday that officials have done nearly everything the public has demanded with regard to the Breonna Taylor case: suspending all no-knock warrants, dropping charges against Taylor's boyfriend for shooting an officer, and now requiring all officers, including those in plainclothes, to wear body cameras.
The only thing he hasn't done is fire the officers involved.
"The bottom line is this is not a swift process," Fischer said.
He said it's important to make sure all investigations are thorough first, and then there are legal processes that need to be followed with regard to any firings.
In the police death of George Floyd in Minneapolis, which sparked protests nationally this week, there was "ample video of the actual event" that doesn't exist in Taylor's case, Fischer said.
It'll be up to Attorney General Daniel Cameron's office to determine whether to bring charges against the officers. Most of the investigation has been handed over to Cameron's office, the FBI Louisville Field Office and the U.S. Attorney's Office, but there are still forensics and other information that's incomplete.
Kala Kachmar is an investigative reporter. Reach her at 502-582-4469; kkachmar@courierjournal.com or @NewsQuip on Twitter.
Fischer talks
Mayor suspends no-knock warrants, tells protesters 'I hear you.' 3A
Protest reaction
What Kentucky and U.S. politicians are saying about the rally. 11A
A protester sits in the middle of Jefferson Street on Thursday facing a line of Louisville Metro Police officers. The protest in downtown Louisville was over the shooting of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old black woman who was shot and killed by police officers on March 13.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Demonstrators chant on the steps of the Hall of Justice at the intersection of Sixth and Jefferson Streets in Louisville on Friday to protest the killing of Breonna Taylor by the Louisville Metro Police .
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Louisville police move through a cloud of tear gas early Friday morning as the deaths of Louisville's Breonna Taylor and Minneapolis' George Floyd at the hands of police spurred protests.
$$$
