Some leaders question police use of tear gas on protesters
Wolfson, Andrew; Costello, Darcy
04 June 2020
Community leaders are questioning the decision by the Louisville Metro Police Department to clear a nonviolent demonstration with tear gas, saying it was inconsistent with Mayor Greg Fischer's embrace of peaceful protest.
They said a disconnect exists between the support for such expression that Fischer announced at a news conference Sunday night and Assistant Police Chief LaVita Chavous' declaration that the crowd was dispersed Sunday because it was an unlawful gathering.
"It is insane to thank people for peaceful protest and then use tear gas because you call it an unlawful gathering," Sadiqa Reynolds, president and CEO of the Louisville Urban League, said in a tweet. "The mayor and LMPD are not on the same page and it is embarrassing."
Louisville Metro Councilman Bill Hollander said in an interview that police have a "difficult job in the current situation," but he had heard from constituents who attended the protest and "were surprised by the use of tear gas before they were told to be home and when they saw nothing but peaceful activity."
Hollander called for an investigation of police tactics over the weekend, which included using tear gas Friday and Saturday nights without announcing it would be deployed.
State Sen. Morgan McGarvey, who was at Jefferson Square on Sunday, said in a tweet that "there was no unrest that I saw. It was peaceful before the curfew." He attached a photo he said was taken 14 minutes before tear gas was used showing a pastoral scene with protesters standing among plants and flowers.
Reynolds said in an interview that Fischer had not responded to her tweet, and spokespeople for the mayor and LMPD did not respond to questions about whether all demonstrators will now be cleared with tear gas.
However, at a department news conference Tuesday, Maj. Dave Allen said tear gas was deployed because police observed numerous homemade weapons in the crowd and on the streets, including Molotov cocktail, bricks, wooden blocks, leaf blowers and jars that had been filled with urine and vomit.
He also showed some with objects that could be used as shields.
Allen said protesters would not be dispersed if only one of those things were observed, but he said the combination made police decide to shut down the rally.
Chavous said Sunday that demonstrators were dispersed because they had gathered illegally without a permit — the first time that reason was given since protests began Thursday night over Breonna Taylor's death at the hands of police.
She and department spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said police acted before the 9 p.m. curfew because of reports that some protesters had leaf blowers that could be used to direct chemicals at police.
But in an interview, Louisville Metro Council President David James, a former police officer, said if that was the case, protesters with those devices should have been arrested.
He said when he heard people were being gassed — and called the mayor to ask about it — Fischer said he didn't know it was occurring, suggesting Chavous didn't consult the mayor about the move.
Chavous told reporters it was her decision.
Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter said in a statement Tuesday that LMPD is there "to protect public safety and keep order, and they make the decision to use tear gas when they believe that is in jeopardy."
She said Fischer is "sorry that some peaceful protesters were caught up in that."
Experts on policing protests said tear gas should only be deployed to quell violence or aggression toward police.
"Don't use tear gas if there is no violence," said Maria Haberfeld, who specializes in police training and use of force at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York.
She also said most departments give warnings before it is deployed, to allow protesters to disperse first.
Experts, including Sam Walker, who teaches criminal justice at the University of Nebraska at Omaha, said police should focus on "unruly troublemakers" rather than those protesting peacefully.
So-called differentiated policing promotes lawful behavior while addressing those engaged in violence, reducing "widespread defiance or rebellion," according to a report titled "Policing Protests" published in January based on a study of unrest in Ferguson, Missouri, and in the occupy movement.
Former Seattle Police Chief Norm Stamper, who was forced to resign in 1999 after protests at the World Trade Organization meeting morphed into widespread violence dubbed the Battle for Seattle, told researchers later that "the worst decision of my career" was using tear gas against "nonviolent and essentially non-threatening protesters."
"The natural consequence ... was that we were the catalyst for heightened tension rather than peacekeepers," he said. "A whole lot of others would not have acted the way they did if we had not acted as we did."
The city's WTO Accountability Review Committee found that demonstrators and members of the public were victims of "sometimes pointless actions to clear the streets."
Former Vancouver, Canada, Deputy Police Chief Doug LePard told the Police Executive Research Forum that it won over protesters — including anarchists from around the world — at the Winter Olympics in 2010 with a "meet and greet" strategy.
"Instead of using riot officers in Darth Vader outfits ... we're out there high-fiving, shaking hands, asking people how they're doing and telling the crowd that 'we are here to keep you safe,'" he said.
On opening night, protesters were hurling barricades and rocks and sticks and even throwing marbles under police officers to try to make them lose their footing.
"They were spitting in the faces of officers, who were wearing soft uniforms and no helmets," LePard said, "They were doing everything they could to provoke a harsh response from police. But they didn't get it."
$$$ 
