Relatives: Accused shooter has mental illness
Wolfson, Andrew
30 June 2020
His mother was murdered in front of him when he was 2 years old, say his grandparents, who raised him.
His father played no part in his life.
As a child, Steven Lopez was diagnosed with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, according to his grandparents, Mercedes and Michael J. Arnett.
But aided by the medication he took as a teenager, he played violin in the Iroquois High School orchestra and enrolled in ROTC, they said, showing a Courier Journal reporter a picture of him in his military uniform.
But Lopez stopped taking his medication in his 20s, they said in an exclusive interview at their home near Iroquois Park. And over the past four months – after he used his stimulus check to buy a handgun – he had threatened them and his life had spun out of control.
On Saturday, according to video surveillance, witnesses and police, he fired a gun into a crowd of protesters at Jefferson Square Park, hitting 27-year-old photographer Tyler Gerth in the face.
Lopez, 23, was a frequent participant in the protests of the police shooting of Breonna Taylor and was often at Jefferson Square Park. On the day of the shooting, protesters say he got in an altercation with someone, left and came back with a gun, firing multiple shots.
Several bystanders returned fire, shooting Lopez in the leg. Gerth died, and Lopez was arrested and eventually charged with murder and wanton endangerment.
He is scheduled to be arraigned Tuesday morning in Jefferson District Court.
Accused shooter struggled with hearing voices Mercedes Arnett said she and her husband haven't been allowed to see or talk to their grandson, but a nurse told her that he said he loved them.
They said Lopez, when he was feeling right, had a heart of gold, but that when he was in the throes of his illness, he talked to himself and to people he imagined were around him.
He dropped out a month before he would have finished high school and held several jobs, they said, including most recently as a truck driver. But they said he quit because he didn't like to be away from home.
He lived in their home until about four months ago, moving out because he bristled at his grandfather's rules.
Since then he had lived on the street and out of a car they had purchased for him, they said.
On March 29, he crashed his 2015 Ford in a one-vehicle accident and was cited for having no driver's license and a canceled plate. The wrecked car sits in front of his grandparents' home.
On April 1 he was found lying on the ground inside a fenced industrial storage area and charged with trespassing. He told police he was chasing his dog, which had gotten inside through a hole in the fence.
On April 10, his grandparents sought a protective order against him, saying he knocked both of them over and threatened them. His grandfather lost a leg to diabetes a few years ago.
"My wife and I are afraid of him and what he is capable of," Michael J. Arnett said in the petition. "He is mentally unstable."
They dropped the matter 12 days later when he seemed to improve, they said.
Joining the Breonna Taylor protests Then Lopez began going downtown, joining the protests over the deaths of Taylor and George Floyd.
His grandparents said they saw him on TV newscasts and were terrified because they knew he had a gun.
"We had told him that was a terrible idea," Arnett said.
On June 17, he was arrested along with 17 other protesters and charged with inciting a riot, disorderly conduct, harassment and possession of drug paraphernalia.
His citation noted he was in possession of a handgun "with two full mags of ammo" at the time of the arrest.
He was released the same day on the condition that he make all court dates and report to pretrial services.
He wasn't charged with any weapons offenses. Jessie Halladay, a spokeswoman for the Louisville Metro Police Department, said the weapon was still in police custody.
Two days later, Lopez was charged again, with unlawful assembly and disorderly conduct, and freed again on the condition he make all court dates, including his arraignment, which was set for Sept. 14.
His grandparents said they haven't sleep in two days. They said they are heartbroken for the victim's family.
And they begged a reporter to pass on their sorrow and condolences.
$$$
