'We're not tired'
Gardner, Hayes
29 July 2020
On June 15, before Tyler Gerth was killed in Jefferson Square Park, before police cleared the park of tents and blocked overnight occupation, before direct action led to hundreds of arrests, Louisville demonstrator Issa Fixit wasn't fatigued. He refuted the idea that stamina was relevant when it came to the protests, which were not yet three weeks old.
"We're not tired," he said then, following a standoff with police on day 19 of the protests in Breonna Taylor's name. "And we're not gonna be tired."
On Thursday, day 57, after spending many of the previous days protesting, he offered the same message.
"Nope. Not tired at all," he said.
Daily marches in Louisville have continued for the past 62 days, with a variety of groups getting involved in the daily demonstrations. There was a "Mama's March" on Thursday evening, a caravan of 40 people from Colorado who trekked over 1,000 miles to protest in Louisville on Friday, a block party blocking Market Street that led to 76 arrests that same day, and then the presence at least 300 members of the out-of-town Not F***ing Around Coalition, a Black militia group that marched downtown on Saturday.
As the days have gone on, numbers at the daily marches have thinned due to fear from Gerth's shooting, the summer heat and the passage of time. Where there might have been hundreds each night, there are now sometimes closer to 50 who take to the streets; but still, the demonstrations persist, led by patient protesters.
"This gathering is here and has been sustained because there are conditions, deprivation, that our people live with in education, employment, in housing, in family structure," said the Rev. A. Russell Awkard, who regularly attends the protests. "But the one thing that they have to deal with immediately is the police in the community."
The demonstrations look a little different than they did a month or two ago. There are no more tents at Jefferson Square Park. There are fewer hung signs and often fewer people hanging around. A basketball hoop provides entertainment more often than performances or speeches.
But two things have remained the same: The Breonna Taylor memorial, which is longstanding and ever-changing, is still in place, and each night, at dusk, a march takes off from the square.
"When the sun goes down, everybody finds that energy to march every night," protest leader Chris Will said.
Louisville banned no-knock warrants on day 15 of the protests, and one of the officers involved in Taylor's death, Brett Hankison, was fired on day 27, but otherwise, the protesters have not seen much practical progress in the form of criminal charges against police or systemic change.
It takes time for change to come to social movements, historically speaking, and some protesters say that they've waited for things like justice and equality for their entire lives. Staying the course requires patience.
"It takes patience because you got some people that believe, 'Oh, we should be tearing stuff up,'" Will said, "or you got people that's like, 'Oh, y'all should burn the city down and you should be fighting the cops.' "
Fixit said: "It takes patience to stay peaceful. It doesn't take patience to keep fighting."
When the Taylor memorial was damaged by an individual at the park this month, protesters quickly painted new signs and canvasses, revitalizing it. When temperatures began to climb into the 90s, protesters waited until dusk to march.
The remaining protesters remain patient, and for the most part, their mood is positive.
"I wouldn't say everybody's happy, but just trying to stay upbeat," Will said an hour before he guided a march last week, dancing with other protest leaders in the middle of Market and Second streets. "Trying to channel any anger to propelling the movement forward."
The crowd is smaller than it was a month ago, but the current protesters haven't shown signs of stopping. That was evident as hundreds turned out to watch the NFAC display Saturday.
"There's no reason to think that, if they've been here 50 days, they won't stay 60, or longer," Awkard said last week. "And Lord help us if the attorney general comes back and says he found no reason to arrest or indict."
On July 16, day 50, about 100 protesters gathered around the refurbished Breonna Taylor memorial and lit candles in her memory at nightfall. One man with a megaphone began singing "Lean On Me," and the crowd soon joined in an impromptu, a capella rendition.
Next, they chanted, warming up for another march. But before they departed, they sang another song, first recorded in 1964.
"It's been a long, long time coming
But I know, a change's gonna come."
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support journalism today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Artwork was placed at "Breonna's Circle" in Jefferson Square Park on July 16 to mark the 50th day of protests following the death of Breonna Taylor at the hands of Louisville police officers.
Photos by Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
William Nickles, right, hands flowers to Heather Green to decorate Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville to mark the 50th day of protests.
$$$
