Harris says US has 'two systems of justice'
Kobin, Billy
12 July 2020
U.S. Sen. Kamala Harris on Friday compared the case of Breonna Taylor and President Donald Trump's commutation of Roger Stone's prison sentence to highlight "the two systems of justice" in the nation.
"Trump commutes the prison sentence of Roger Stone while the officers that killed Breonna Taylor are still free," Harris, D-Calif., tweeted Friday night. "The two systems of justice in this country must end."
The tweet from the senator, who had made a bid for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination and is among those considered as a potential Joe Biden running mate, came not long after the White House announced the Stone commutation.
A longtime confidant of Trump, Stone is a Republican operative who was convicted of lying to Congress to protect the president's campaign from an investigation into Russian election interference.
Trump's decision to grant clemency came days before Stone was set to report to prison for a 40-month sentence handed down in February.
"Roger Stone was targeted by an illegal Witch Hunt that never should have taken place," Trump tweeted Saturday morning. "It is the other side that are criminals, including Biden and Obama, who spied on my campaign - AND GOT CAUGHT!"
Harris and other congressional Democrats slammed the move, which wiped out Stone's sentence but left his conviction in place.
Stone had been the last person charged in special counsel Robert Mueller's nearly two-year probe into Russian interference in the 2016 election, an investigation that Trump has repeatedly dismissed as a "hoax."
Mueller ultimately concluded last year that Russia conducted a "sweeping" campaign to help Trump, but found no evidence he coordinated with the effort.
Harris compared the commutation of Stone, who is white, with the death of Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman fatally shot by Louisville police officers inside her apartment during a March drug raid.
No drugs were recovered from Taylor's apartment, and the deadly incident has since touched off lawsuits, independent investigations, mass protests around Louisville and the firing of one of the involved officers.
But protesters and attorneys for the Taylor's family have demanded that the two other officers who fired their weapons during the March 13 search warrant also lose their jobs.
And they want the involved Louisville Metro Police officers to face criminal charges for their actions that led to Taylor's death.
In May, Harris and Rep. Lucy McBath, D-Georgia, wrote a letter to the U.S. Department of Justice asking for an immediate federal investigation into LMPD's "patterns and practices."
The DOJ's Civil Rights Division and the FBI have since opened a federal investigation into the circumstances around Taylor's death to see if "any federal criminal civil rights charges are warranted and appropriate."
But a spokeswoman for Harris said this week that "it seems unlikely that there will be a pattern and practice investigation" into LMPD.
That came after Assistant Attorney General Stephen Boyd wrote in a letter to federal lawmakers that the Justice Department is authorized to investigate "systemic violations of the Constitution or laws of the United States."
"We will carefully consider all information and will direct any future actions warranted by the facts and the law," Boyd wrote, in regards to Taylor's case.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron is also reviewing the conduct of the involved LMPD officers, but he has declined to say when his office will conclude its probe and release its results.
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif.
$$$
