Recruits impress new UK assistant
Hale, Jon
03 Sep 2020
LEXINGTON — Kentucky basketball's new recruiting coordinator is still getting to know the Wildcat players.
But Jai Lucas, who was hired as special assistant to the head coach and recruiting coordinator earlier this week, has already been impressed by the players' character after their video speaking out against racism and police brutality.
"Whether you're for it or against it, I think if you are a Kentucky fan, if you are a fan of whatever university you're a part of and your team has a message that they want to be heard and spoke about, I think you should at least have the opportunity to come and listen to see what they have and their concerns," Lucas said during a Zoom news conference Wednesday. "That's how the family and community comes together, through conversations, through communication."
Reaction to the video, which closes with a shot of the team and coach John Calipari saying "Black lives matter" in unison, has drawn passionate responses. The video had been shared almost 5,000 times on Facebook as of Wednesday morning.
There have been no shortage of opinions for and against the video shared in replies on Facebook and Twitter, but a vocal segment of fans threatening to no longer watch the team because of the video have drawn much attention.
Could that negative reaction turn recruits, many of whom are Black, away from Kentucky?
"It's not much of a concern at all on my part," said Lucas, who will be tasked with heading UK's recruiting efforts. "I think for the players, it's their message and what they wanted to put out. Our job as a staff is to support them and educate them. I think the message of what they were saying really in my opinion — at least I think a bit of it — is not as political as it is being received. I just think they were talking more so about themselves and their experiences and people that look like them. I think that's a big part of it.
"In the recruiting part of it, it kind of goes both ways because ... most of the kids on the team and most of the student athletes are athletes of color. So, those kids are watching to see what each university is doing and how they are responding to what's going on. It is a big thing that is out in the media eye right now."
At one point in the video, the team lists off a list of Black people killed by police, including former UK student Breonna Taylor.
Calipari has been vocal in speaking out against racism in the wake of nationwide protests responding to the deaths of Taylor, George Floyd and others. He launched the McLendon Minority Leadership Initiative to "create access to and opportunity for meaningful employment experience for minority candidates" in college athletic administration. He hosted a panel on race issues during an episode of his "Coffee with Cal" Facebook show and promised to listen to any concerns his Black players might have.
Calipari recently said he was willing to listen to a group of faculty from UK's African American and African Studies program calling for the name of Rupp Arena to be changed because they feel Adolph Rupp's name "has come to stand for racism and exclusion in UK athletics and alienates Black students, fans, and attendees," but Calipari said he had not heard from any recruits concerned about the arena name.
"I think you just have to be educated in recruiting kids and telling them the lay of the land, what's around them and being honest with them and letting them know no matter what we are here to support and protect you," Lucas said of the negative comments pointed at players after the video. "It's not the opinion of everybody who's associated with the program or even the state of Kentucky or anything. You're going to have people who have their opinions."
While the the Kentucky State Fraternal Order of Police criticized the video in a tweet that was later deleted, the video has received the endorsement of several prominent Kentuckians.
Gov. Andy Beshear said at his Tuesday coronavirus news conference he had not yet watched the video but fully supported players' right to voice their concerns.
"I believe these are young men that have the right to speak their truth and to use their voice to talk about the things in the world that they believe are unjust," he said. "These are real individuals. And while we have watched our players for many years, we've got to support at least their right to speak out. With everything the way it's going right now, it probably took some courage to do that and took courage by Coach Cal to embrace that."
Jon Hale: jahale@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @JonHale_CJ. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/jonh.
BJ Boston played at Hoophall over the weekend and discussed how he talks about UK to others.
Jon Lopez/Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame
$$$
