Protests put state leaders on spot
Bailey, Phillip M.
07 June 2020 
The law enforcement shootings of African Americans Breonna Taylor and David McAtee has engulfed Louisville in historic civil unrest, and there are no indications the protests and demonstration will cease.
Protesters continue to swarm downtown and East End suburbs even after some were pelted with pepper balls and tear gas, and the rising volume of anger and frustration has elected leaders of both parties scrambling for solutions.
Activists demanding wholesale changes to how law enforcement interacts with African American communities is not new. But what is apparent is that the demands of protesters on the streets are making it to the eardrums of Kentucky's local, state and national leaders.
Here's a rundown of what those elected officials have said, have done and have not.
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer Each day of protests is a bad one for the three-term Democratic mayor, who is being blasted by left-leaning activists and conservatives.
Fischer has been playing catch-up since the March shooting of Taylor was injected into the national Black Lives Matter bloodstream, and this week he tried to tout what he's done —suspending no-knock warrants chief among them — to calm concerns.
Among the top demands from grassroots organizers is for the three Louisville Metro Police officers involved in the Taylor shooting to be fired. That's what the mayor of Minneapolis did in the case of George Floyd, a black man who is the first name often shouted at demonstrations around the world.
"I've been speaking with protesters (and) I hear their cry for firing of the officers in the Breonna Taylor case," Fischer said in a tweet Wednesday. "But as mayor, there are things I can do in the fight for justice and equity, (and) things I can't do because of laws made at the state or federal level."
Fischer threw his hands up, saying that under city's collective bargaining agreement with the police union, he can't legally fire police officers. He said if he did that now, without the process running its course, "they would be reinstated within weeks, with back pay (and) potentially damages."
So what?
That's the perspective of some, such as Josh Poe, a scholar-activist in Louisville who works closely with Black Lives Matter. He casts the mayor's position as nothing more than another example of Fischer's flaccid fortitude against taking significant action.
"There is nothing in Kentucky law or FOP contract that prohibits (Fischer) from firing the officers who murdered Breonna Taylor," Poe shot back on Twitter. "They could later be reinstated (and) get lost wages. Who cares? Fire them now."
Other outspoken progressives, such as Jefferson County school board member Chris Kolb, a liberal lion on the board, have called on Fischer to resign.
On the political right, Fischer is also catching hell from the Louisville police union, which went on a Twitter tirade Wednesday suggesting he needs to be impeached by the Metro Council.
"Can we fire (Fischer) for his incompetency," the now-deleted tweet said, "and divisive non-compassionate leadership?"
Sources indicate it is only a matter a time before a coalition of local Democrats and prominent state Republicans join activists in calling for him to leave office.
Andy Beshear Those close to the governor, who have asked for anonymity to speak freely, described Beshear as being livid at Fischer and Louisville police this week.
For starters, the governor was promised on Monday by city officials he would see body camera footage of the McAtee shooting that afternoon, according to at least one source.
But Beshear eventually learned no such footage existed because the officers at 26th and Broadway didn't have their body cameras activated when McAtee, 53, the owner of a barbecue store, was shot. Two police officers and two members of the National Guard fired their weapons, officials said.
It was only after McAtee's shooting that Fischer fired LMPD Chief Steve Conrad.
The governor was again aggravated with Louisville leaders, according to a source, after police offered commentary while releasing video from McAtee's business that they said showed McAtee firing a gun before he was shot.
Beshear felt Louisville police should have released the footage without comment, according to the source, who worked with Beshear during the 2019 gubernatorial campaign.
Beshear is also going to receive kudos from elder activists for putting J. Michael Brown, the state's Executive Cabinet secretary, in charge of the Kentucky State Police investigation of the McAtee shooting.
Brown, a longtime adviser, is a former district court judge in Jefferson County who is well-respected among older African American civil rights leaders, especially.
But while Beshear announced there will be a reduced National Guard presence in Louisville and that they will stay out of the predominately black West End, the governor has been chastised by some for even listening to Fischer's request for the troops and allowing the force to arrive in the first place.
Mitch McConnell The Senate majority leader, who is from Louisville, indicated that while local and state leaders are on the front lines, "there may be a role for Congress to play in this as well."
What sort of legislative action that looks like wasn't made clear, but McConnell appears open to the discussion.
"There is no question that there is residual racism in America, no question about that," he told reporters in Washington. "It's not in dispute. It's been a longtime dilemma, and we all wish we could get to a better place."
What got little attention this week, and what may surprise Louisville liberals, is that McConnell offered up a resolution that specifically elevated Taylor's name and her shooting and that was slightly critical of police.
The GOP leader's resolution referred to the March 13 slaying of Taylor as one of the "apparent instances of unjust police violence" in the country. It added that the case "must be met with immediate, thorough investigations and full justice."
If that is stunning to McConnell critics, brace yourself: Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, the powerhouse Democrat from New York, blocked that resolution in favor of his own that sought to take President Donald Trump to task.
John Yarmuth Louisville's U.S. congressman said in a series of tweets this week that his prayers for the Taylor and McAtee families "are not nearly enough."
Yarmuth, however, didn't want to specify when asked through a spokesman if the Louisville police officers involved in either case should be fired or prosecuted.
Instead, his office spotlighted two measures that he has co-sponsored that speak directly to police reform.
The first is a House resolution spearheaded by members of the Congressional Black Caucus that condemns all acts of police brutality, racial profiling and excessive use of force.
It's a proposal that has some hefty policy changes you hear echoed by activists shutting down parts of Louisville, such as supporting efforts to establish all-civilian review boards with the authority to investigate allegations of police misconduct.
Yarmuth also has put his signature on a bill that would require and fund sensitivity and diversity training for law enforcement officers, and would encourage states to require the independent investigation and prosecution of the use of deadly force by law enforcement officers.
"There is an unfathomable canyon between the experiences of white and Black Americans," Yarmuth said in a tweet Tuesday. "But it is a divide we must bridge — as soon as possible — and the responsibility is on white Americans to listen to our Black friends and neighbors and work with them to get there."
Rand Paul After issuing a statement condemning the use of no-knock warrants like the one obtained in the Taylor case and sharing two stories about the incident, including The Courier Journal's, our junior senator didn't have much to say about the unrest in Kentucky's largest city.
That was until Thursday afternoon, when Paul sent out a tweet underscoring how Floyd and Taylor's shootings were "tragedies and injustices." The statement was accompanied with a video of Paul's legislative efforts to reform the criminal justice system.
"There is no excuse for the actions of those involved, or the abuse of government power that enables tragedies like these," he tweeted.
It's somewhat telling Paul hasn't been more outspoken because he is a regular critic of government abuse of power against citizens, and one would think he has thoughts about the National Guard being ordered into Louisville.
It also certainly didn't help Paul's reputation with black activists when he admitted this week that he was the one who blocked the national anti-lynching bill in the Senate.
Paul has been known to speak out about the militarization of police in the past. In the past week, for example, the senator was urging Trump to veto a reauthorization of electronic surveillance legislation.
Louisville police used those same tactics against protesters and journalists, but for whatever reason Paul doesn't appear interested in taking a swing at this slow pitch in his own state legislatively or rhetorically.
Law enforcement watch as hundreds of protesters peacefully cruised throughout downtown Louisville and the Highlands on Tuesday evening.
$$$
