Yes, this is weird.
Aulbach, Lucas
05 Sep 2020
The 2019 Kentucky Derby was one of the strangest ever — it ended with a disqualification, a 65-1 long shot winning the garland of roses and a lawsuit over the results that finally concluded last week, nearly a year and a half later.It was going to take a lot for this year's Kentucky Derby to top that. But as 2020 has proven time and time again, it's possible we haven't seen anything yet.
The scene inside Churchill Downs won't look anything like the other 145 Runs for the Roses. Racetrack officials announced in late August that the stands and the infamous infield would be closed to fans this year in an effort to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. You won't hear the roar of the crowd when the field is coming down the stretch.
You may hear a crowd outside Churchill Downs, though. As protests continue to roil in the city over the police killing of Breonna Taylor, several local and national groups have said they plan to take to the streets to make sure their movement isn't lost in the bright spotlight of Derby Day.
One tradition that will remain is the playing of "My Old Kentucky Home," which is always performed minutes ahead of the Run for the Roses.
Steve Buttleman, Churchill Downs' longtime bugler, will perform "My Old Kentucky Home" with no lyrics ahead of the 146th Kentucky Derby.
The controversial song written in 1853 by Stephen Foster is a Kentucky slave's lament about being sold down the river. For years some have expressed concerns over the anthem and say Churchill Downs should not play it, especially this year, against a backdrop of racial justice protests being held across Louisville and the country.
"The 100-year tradition of singing the state song of Kentucky has been thoughtfully and appropriately modified and will be preceded by a moment of silence and reflection," a spokesman for Churchill Downs wrote on Twitter on Friday.
The moment of silence will "recognize the inequities that many in our nation still face and reflect on renewed hope," spokesman Darren Rogers said.
There's a lot to unpack this year, so let's take a closer look at what to expect.
What time is the race? How can I watch? The 146th Kentucky Derby will begin at 7:02 p.m. and will air nationally on NBC, with a preshow starting at 2:30 p.m.
Needless to say, the party at home is going to look a little different than the decadence and depravity of the infield. But Churchill Downs and others involved with the race are still encouraging racing fans to enjoy the show from their living rooms.
A new website, kentuckyderbyathome.com, has featured behind-the-scenes Kentucky Derby content every day this month leading up to the race and will stream every race on Saturday. If you are planning to watch with friends and family at home, remember that social gatherings are limited to 10 or fewer people and it's recommended to hold events outdoors, while keeping social distancing in mind. (That means staying 6 feet apart and wearing your facial mask when you're not actively eating or drinking.)
What else is happening at Churchill Downs? A full card of 14 races will take place Saturday at Churchill Downs.
The first race begins at 11 a.m., and the action continues up until the Old Forester Turf Classic at 5:50 p.m. Then, after a four-month delay, the 146th Kentucky Derby will be run just after the call to the post at 7:02 p.m. Live coverage from the racetrack will air on NBC all afternoon in Louisville.
No fans will be allowed inside for the races or on the Churchill Downs backside Saturday morning, though kentuckyderbyathome.com will carry an early livestream from the stalls.
What's happening outside? Saturday will be a busy day outside Churchill Downs. Several protests are being planned around town over the death of Taylor, a Black emergency room technician who was shot and killed by Louisville Metro Police officers executing a no-knock warrant at her apartment in March.
What's expected to be the biggest demonstration will take place at South Central Park, less than a mile from Churchill Downs, at 4:30 p.m., as local and national protesters plan to gather ahead of the race. A separate "pro-patriot" rally is scheduled for 8 a.m. at Cox Park before that group heads downtown, and a Black militia known as the Not F***ing Around Coalition is also planning a demonstration.
Several local groups involved with the protests have called for a boycott or for the Derby to be canceled entirely, as a number of local leaders have said the event has excluded Black people in Louisville for generations. Churchill Downs acknowledged in a statement Thursday that it needs to do more to "to ensure that every member of our community is a part of our traditions."
"We recognize that people in our community and across our nation are hurting right now," Churchill Downs said in a statement. "The atmosphere of the Kentucky Derby will be different this year as we respond to those calls for change. This will be a Derby unlike any other. As it should be."
Who is protesting? The South Central Park protest was organized by Louisville's Justice and Freedom Coalition, which was founded by local pastor Timothy Findley Jr., in conjunction with Until Freedom, a national social justice organization that has moved to Louisville for the summer to support protesters. Until Freedom was behind the recent protest near Churchill Downs that ended with more than 60 arrests.
The Cox Park demonstration was organized by pro-Second Amendment online personality "The Angry Viking," who has said he expects hundreds to attend the rally on the riverfront. Louisville Metro Police Department Maj. Aubrey Gregory said earlier this week that he'd spoken with organizers of that rally "to try and facilitate and organize the safe exercise of their First Amendment rights."
The NFAC, meanwhile, will make its second visit to Louisville after hosting a demonstration in late July. Hundreds were in the city for that rally, and the group's leader, John "Grandmaster Jay" Johnson, has said he expects a large crowd to be back in Louisville this weekend. Gregory said he's personally been in contact with Johnson and other organizers and that they plan to be in town for four or five hours before leaving.
Are any streets shut down? The traffic situation is one silver lining to come out of the decision to close the Kentucky Derby to fans.
In southern Louisville, Central Avenue will be closed to all foot and vehicle traffic from Third Street to Taylor Boulevard on Saturday. Nearby Oakdale Avenue will be limited to local access only at Third Street, according to LMPD.
Those are the only planned street closures. On Thursday, LMPD announced some parking restrictions in downtown Louisville. Parking will not be allowed on Saturday in the 500 block of West Jefferson Street, the 300 block of South Sixth Street and the 500 block of West Liberty Street, according to police.
LMPD recently announced it would no longer allow protests on public streets and arrested dozens who did not comply in late August as part of an Until Freedom demonstration. The department also said Thursday it will stop vehicle caravans "exhibiting unsafe behavior."
What are city and state officials doing? LMPD officials told reporters on Wednesday that they had been in contact with several groups of protesters ahead of Saturday as they prepare for a busy afternoon.
Kentucky State Police troopers and National Guard soldiers will be in Louisville to assist, as they are every year for Friday's Kentucky Oaks and Saturday's Kentucky Derby, and all LMPD officers are required to be available to work over the weekend.
Mayor Greg Fischer encouraged Louisville residents to be wary of false information and rumors that could spread ahead of the race and said local officials are ready for whatever Saturday brings.
"We understand why protesters will want to be at Churchill Downs," the mayor said Wednesday. "It's obviously a big event, and we support peaceful and lawful efforts to draw attention to the need for racial equity in our city in our country."
During a Friday press conference, Assistant Chief of Louisville Metro Police LaVita Chavous refuted claims made at an earlier press conference organized by Until Freedom.
Chavous said law enforcement did not put up any additional fencing around Churchill Downs in response to protests this year. She also said that law enforcement did not bring in tanks — just armored vehicles to manage potentially dangerous incidents and "for safety of everyone."
"We do this every year, in, we prepare days in advance and what you see is evident in that preparation," Chavous said.
OK, so who should I bet on? Tiz the Law is the name you probably know. With 3-5 odds, he's the biggest Kentucky Derby favorite since Spectacular Bid in 1979 (Spectacular Bid won the Kentucky Derby and Preakness that year, for what it's worth).
But if you're looking to make a buck on a long shot, you have options. Honor A.P. is the morning-line second choice and will have two-time Kentucky Derby winner Mike Smith riding him. Bob Baffert's won two Triple Crowns as a trainer and has two horses, Authentic and Thousand Words, running on Saturday. And if you're feeling really lucky, you can go for the big money and bet on 100-1 long shots Winning Impressions and Mr. Big News.
Of course, betting looks a little different this year. With Churchill Downs closed, bettors are encouraged to place wagers on twinspires.com, Churchill Downs' online wagering platform, through its app or website. A username and password are required, and while signing up is free, the bets are (unfortunately) not — you'll be asked to transfer money from your bank account into your account and then place your bets.
It's not the Kentucky Derby we were expecting a year ago, but 2020 hasn't been the year we were expecting either.
No matter what happens at the track, Saturday will be one for the history books.
Kirby Adams and Ben Tobin contributed to this report. Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Inside
"Magic saddle" has been on three Derby winners. 6A
Ohio car dealer makes his own Derby "sky box." 8A
Churchill Downs acknowledges protests. 9A
Refunds vary based on where fans bought tickets. 10A
Sackatoga Stable and Barclay Tagg get another shot at glory. Sports, 1B
Masks are considered to be an essential accessory for horse owners, trainers and Churchill Downs staff Friday morning.
photos by Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Terry Finley, part of the owners group for Derby hopeful Winning Impression, wears a horse-themed mask while at Churchill Downs on Friday morning.
Some people opted for surgical-style masks, while others chose cloth face masks representing their horses or celebrating the sport of racing.
Sackatoga Stable managing partner Jack Knowlton, owner of 2020 Derby favorite Tiz the Law, pulls down his mask to talk to the owners group as they gather near the paddock area at Churchill Downs on Friday.
The first few personnel arrive for the Kentucky Oaks on Friday morning. No fans are allowed this year.
The horses seemed unbothered by the presence of masks on the faces of everyone in attendance.
$$$
