Despite protesters' efforts to be nonviolent, 2 police officers shot
Gardner, Hayes; Loosemore, Bailey
25 Sep 2020
"We were grieving. We were hurt. We were angry. We were everything that we should have been. (But) we have to remain peaceful, and we have to live to fight another day."
Tyra Walker
A co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression
Speaking before a crowd at the Breonna Taylor memorial in Jefferson Square Park, Until Freedom co-founder Tamika Mallory stressed nonviolence.
It was just before 1 p.m. Wednesday, and hundreds had gathered at the public square — a home base through 119 days of protests downtown — to hear if criminal charges would be brought against the Louisville Metro Police officers who had shot and killed the unarmed Black woman while serving a search warrant at her southern Louisville home.
"We have to understand that we have a responsibility to the rest of this nation and to generations to come that we conduct ourselves, again, not peacefully, but nonviolently," Mallory said, "so that the story that comes out of here is that we are not the murderers, we are not the looters, we are not the burners, we are not the ones, they did it to us, and we are only responding."
But by Thursday morning, the Louisville story that reached people around the country and globe was, in fact, one of violence.
Windows had been smashed, small fires had been set and two LMPD officers were shot during an hourslong protest that traversed downtown Louisville and several surrounding neighborhoods, following an announcement that no officers would be indicted on charges for Taylor's death.
LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said the shooting took place around 8:30 p.m. near the intersection of Brook Street and Broadway in downtown Louisville.
In a press conference Thursday, he said Maj. Aubrey Gregory was hit in the thigh during the incident and has been released from the hospital, while Officer Robinson Desroches was struck in the abdomen and is recovering from surgery.
Larynzo Johnson, 26, is accused in the shooting.
"Last night's situation could have been so much worse for our officers and for the people who were protesting when the gunfire rang out," Schroeder said. "We are extremely fortunate these two officers will recover."
Chris Wells, a protest leader, spoke with a police officer during the march Wednesday in an effort to safely navigate the group. He denounced the violence of Wednesday night.
"To be honest, there is no room for violence," he said. "... We are all the human race. We all live in the same house, and that house is the United States of America. So there should be no bloodshed."
Tyra Walker, a co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, said she and others discouraged violence at the protest through the afternoon and night. But emotions were difficult to contain.
"We were grieving. We were hurt. We were angry. We were everything that we should have been," Walker said. "(But) we have to remain peaceful, and we have to live to fight another day."
Adrian Baker, an activist and the student body president of Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, said Wednesday's gunfire does deflect from the message of the protesters' movement.
"It does distract away," he said. "I denounce any violence. But we have the knowledge that this could have been avoided, this type of response could have been avoided."
He also called the shooting a "response to injustice."
"We are protesting the injustice of a life being lost already," he said. "And so, just as those police officers' lives matter that were shot, we are feeling as if Breonna Taylor's life does not matter because it's evident."
The decision to not indict the officers came from a Jefferson County grand jury following an investigation by Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron.
Though the grand jury chose to charge former Detective Brett Hankison on three counts of first-degree wanton endangerment for shooting into a neighboring apartment, it did not charge him or two other Louisville officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment — Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove — with killing the 26-year-old emergency room technician.
Tensions and emotions were high following the announcement, and protesters were visibly angry as they marched through Germantown, the Highlands and back downtown.
On multiple occasions, a demonstrator extinguished a fire in a trash can that others had lit. Police met marchers with force at the intersection of Bardstown Road and Midland Avenue in the Highlands, arresting more than a dozen people and firing pepper balls. Protesters threw bottles at the police.
Just after 7:30 p.m., some set fire to the wooden boards affixed to the exterior of the Hall of Justice downtown. No one extinguished them this time, and police emerged from the building to put it out as protesters again lobbed water bottles at the police.
LMPD said officers arrested 127 people through the course of the protests, and Schroeder said 16 "instances of looting" occurred outside the downtown area along Broadway, Preston Highway, Outer Loop and Poplar Level Road.
A 9 p.m. curfew remains in effect through the weekend.
In addition to Louisville, protesters took to the streets across the country, from the White House in Washington, D.C., to New York City, Chicago and Seattle, among others.
In Asheville, North Carolina, police said protesters left a casket full of dirt and "cow manure" outside the police headquarters, and authorities used tear gas in Atlanta and pepper spray in Seattle to disperse crowds.
Nationally, celebrities and leaders spoke out about the Breonna Taylor case.
The Rev. Jesse Jackson released a statement encouraging athletes to boycott and not attend the University of Kentucky and the University of Louisville, as well calling for a boycott of the Kentucky Derby in the future. He referred to Kentucky as a "pariah state."
He also spoke against violence.
"Our hearts are heavy, but violence is neither the answer nor our agenda," he stated. "We must use our economic and political power to make the real difference we all desire. We must turn our pain over Breonna's murder into power at the polls."
Protests continued Thursday, with a crowd of around 200 people marched down Jefferson Street before heading back to Jefferson Square Park in the evening.
While marching they confronted about a dozen armed counterprotesters — many of whom were dressed in military-style garb.
One of the counterprotesters, dressed in a camouflage helmet and a green vest, said he was from North Carolina and was in town as a member of the "Oath Keepers." The man said the group was there to keep the property of local businesses safe.
"We're not here to start nothing," he told reporters.
While some from the racial justice march confronted the out-of-town group, others urged them to keep their distance.
"Back up! Don't be stupid!" one man yelled. "Walk through and keep moving. Do not engage these people with no guns!"
What's next for the movement in Louisville remains to be seen. Protest regular Aaron Jordan said the grand jury's decision and Louisville's response have "already changed things," with people protesting the lack of indictments "all over the world."
"People are infuriated," he said.
"It's big for us because we have our disagreements and stuff at the square, but people around the world don't know about that stuff that we deal with day to day. They just see dedicated protesters and they want to do their part standing in solidarity."
Reporters Chris Kenning and Sarah Ladd contributed to this report. Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Reach reporter Hayes Gardner at hgardner@gannett.com or on Twitter @HayesGardner.
"We are extremely fortunate these two officers will recover."
LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder
"We were grieving. We were hurt. We were angry. We were everything that we should have been. (But) we have to remain peaceful, and we have to live to fight another day."
Tyra Walker
A co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression
Megan Goins, left, gets a hug from Eric Reynolds after her release from Metro Corrections on Thursday after she and 126 other protesters were arrested following the announcement of the grand jury's decision.
A protester yells at police during protests Wednesday evening in downtown Louisville following the grand jury announcement in the Breonna Taylor case.
Travis Nagdy leads chants for the release of fellow protesters and livestreamers outside Metro Corrections on Thursday. Police say 127 protesters were arrested Wednesday during protests following the announcement of the grand jury's decision in the Taylor case.
$$$
