Protesters march to AG's front yard
Loosemore, Bailey; Gardner, Hayes; Tobin, Ben
15 July 2020
More than 100 protesters took their calls for justice for Breonna Taylor to Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's front yard in Louisville's East End on Tuesday, where they locked arms while facing arrest.
Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency room technician, was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro Police fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a search warrant as part of a narcotics investigation.
Protesters have long demanded that Cameron criminally charge the three officers involved in the shooting: Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove. During a Monday press conference, Cameron said he still has no timeline for when his office will conclude its investigation of the case.
Interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder terminated Hankison on June 23, writing that he showed "extreme indifference to the value of human life" and that his use of deadly force was improper. Hankison has appealed the firing. Meanwhile, the other two officers have been placed on administrative reassignment.
The march was organized by Until Freedom, a national social justice organization. After a training earlier in the day, protesters took a bus and others followed in cars in a caravan and arrived at Ballard High School, where they practiced chants.
The group, which included many people wearing Until Freedom shirts and face masks that said "Breonna Taylor," started marching down Herr Lane around 4 p.m. before arriving at Cameron's home in Graymoor-Devondale. Dozens of Louisville police officers showed up shortly afterward.
The protesters' chants included "How do you spell murderer? LMPD" and "Whose streets? our streets."
Linda Sarsour, a co-founder of Until Freedom, addressed a few neighbors who peered out their windows and stood on their lawns: "We want you all to know that you may see us often in your neighborhood."
"We are here to hold Daniel Cameron accountable and make sure that he does his job, because he is not doing his job."
Police subsequently surrounded protesters, with many demonstrators sitting down on the lawn. At one point, a group sang "We Shall Overcome." Police proceeded to arrest what appeared to be at least a dozen people, with a police helicopter circling overhead.
A police spokesman said Tuesday night that 87 people were arrested and each charged with intimidating a participant in a legal process, disorderly conduct and criminal trespassing.
As one man was arrested, he led a call-and-response chant of "say her name, Breonna Taylor."
Police eventually blocked off the street in front of Cameron's home, and the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office provided assistance. Meanwhile, a neighbor nearby Cameron's home offered to let protesters gather on their lawn as the demonstrators were pushed off the street.
In response to the protest, Cameron said that "justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property, and it's not achieved through escalation. It's achieved by examining the facts in an impartial and unbiased manner. That is exactly what we are going to do in this investigation."
"From the beginning, our office has set out to do its job, to fully investigate the events surrounding the death of Ms. Breonna Taylor," Cameron said. "We continue with a thorough and fair investigation, and today's events will not alter our pursuit of the truth.
"The stated goal of today's protest at my home was to 'escalate.' That is not acceptable and only serves to further division and tension within our community."
Sarsour, who was arrested during the protest, said the group came to Louisville because the city "is going to be the capital of America when it comes to justice for those who are being slain."
"I want you to know that what you're doing has literal ripple effects in every city in America," Sarsour said.
In an interview with The Courier Journal, Sarsour said that she has been an organizer against police brutality for roughly 15 years and that "Breonna Taylor's story really just hit me in a different way."
"We've had dozens of Black women who have been murdered at the hands of the police across the country and not one single woman has received the justice," Sarsour said. "For us, we believe that Breonna Taylor and the case of Breonna Taylor and Louisville is the ground zero for the conversation on police brutality."
She added: "We're not going to stop until Breonna Taylor gets justice because if Breonna Taylor doesn't get justice, the message across the country is that when a Black woman gets murdered, she is not going to get justice, and that is not alright with us."
At the protesters' training session on West Main Street earlier in the day, Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, was given a standing ovation.
As of 6:30 p.m., a few dozen protesters remained sitting on the lawn as police moved to arrest them. Those who were not being arrested had returned to their vehicles at Ballard High School.
Protesters are told to move back by LMPD officers on Bedford Lane outside the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron in Graymoor-Devondale on Tuesday afternoon.
Photos by Matt Stone/Courier Journal
A police helicopter hovers as a protester calls for justice outside Cameron's home.
$$$
