We must channel anger into resolve, united in the fight for justice, equity
Author: YOUR TURN
07 June 2020
On Tuesday, I spoke to a crowd gathered in Jefferson Square Park, protesting the death of Breonna Taylor. At one point, a young woman took the microphone and asked, "What can you do now? Because the people are suffering now. The people are broken now."
Her question comes directly from the pain fueling protests that have filled the streets of our city and more than 150 others across America. And it speaks to a core challenge facing us all: Addressing the racism and inequity built into the foundation of the American system.
In 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson created a national advisory group, known as the Kerner Commission, to study the causes of unrest that year. Its report, issued in March 1968, blamed poor neighborhood conditions and limited economic opportunities for black Americans, due to racism and rampant discrimination in housing and labor markets. The report warned that without intervention, "Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white – separate and unequal."
Tragically, intervention never came. So still today, too many people suffer because the promises enshrined in our Constitution are unfulfilled by societal systems that devalue African American lives. Our economy, schools, courts, health services, law enforcement and government still fail too many, cost too many lives. Too many voices have gone unheard for too long.
Now, those voices have made themselves heard, in the wake of the death of Breonna and so many others. While I've called for reviews to find the truth in the local cases – and made swift policy changes – we must do more.
We must address systemic failures that have produced the pain and anger we're seeing in our streets. That's a battle fought on multiple fronts, and our city has been engaged. We've invested nearly $1 billion in historically underinvested west Louisville. Our Center for Health Equity works to equalize health outcomes throughout the city, focusing on root causes of disparities. We've established workforce development programs like SummerWorks, Code Louisville and the Future of Work to address the plain reality that while talent is evenly distributed throughout our city, opportunity and access are not.
We've worked to address historic racism through Lean Into Louisville and Synergy, which has brought hundreds of police officers and residents together to talk about how to improve police-community trust and legitimacy.
I could list more investments, but I know they aren't enough. Sadly, the gulf between where we are and where we need to be is far greater than we've been able to address.
So, what do we do now?
We act. We embrace the rare opportunity of this moment –when America's citizens, institutions and governments at all levels appear finally ready to begin honestly addressing the impact of generations of racism and inequity.
This is the moment for change, and here are some changes you can expect:
Top-to-Bottom Review of LMPD – As part of our national search for a new police chief, Metro Government is hiring an outside firm to conduct a thorough review of LMPD to ensure its policies, procedures and structures align with our community's goals and values. We'll also ask the public what they want to see from LMPD and the next chief. Our officers have a dangerous and essential job. To create a safer city, we need the right leadership, processes, training and a heightened level of community trust.
Challenging the Business and Philanthropy Community to Be a Force for Justice – To address systemic racism and poverty, we need our corporations to invest more in our community. As an example, Humana just announced an $11.5 million commitment to rebuilding, workforce and inclusion efforts here, including $6.5 million to complete the Louisville Urban League's Sports and Learning Complex, for which Metro Government is a major funder. Today, I make a specific ask: Let's make this the summer of opportunity for our most at-risk young people. One of the difficult effects of the COVID-19 pandemic has been a decrease in businesses hiring SummerWorks youth, so Metro is working to employ them in a public works project, or in tech training. We need our business and philanthropy community to help fund this work; go to summerworks.org/partners to sign on.
Push for National Change as President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors – I become the USCM president in July, and will use that national platform to fight systemic racism and poverty, the effects of which consume most city government resources. An example: It is past time for federal government to raise the grossly inadequate minimum wage to a family-supporting wage, and to implement strategies for rebuilding America's cities and towns.
This is all possible, and Muhammad Ali's hometown is the place to begin. Four years ago this week, our city came together like never before to celebrate the life of The Greatest, showing the world that Ali's spirit is part of who we are. That was evidenced again by the thousands of Louisvillians who've come together over the last week to fight for equity and justice.
Those marching are right to be angry. We must do better. I must do better.
And we will – channeling anger into resolve, taking this fight from the streets into the community where there is much work to do.
In 1968, the Kerner report provided hope about improving race relations and sowing seeds of equity. "This deepening racial division is not inevitable," it said. "The movement apart can be reversed. Choice is still possible."
Fifty-two years later, choice is still possible.
A good place to start? Vote! That's how change becomes reality.
Despite all the turmoil and pain we've experienced, I remain hopeful. And I pledge to do all I can to help our city and country heal and work with you to show America how a city can unite to build equity, peace and justice.
Greg Fischer is the mayor of Louisville.
$$$
