2 with 'Hunger Strikers for Breonna' carry on after 3 weeks without food
Aulbach, Lucas
11 Aug 2020
Sunday marked day 20 of fasting for the "Hunger Strikers for Breonna." Week four began on Monday.
Two of the four who began the hunger strike in mid-July, which they said would end when the officers involved in the police shooting of Breonna Taylor were fired and stripped of their pensions, are no longer abstaining from caloric intake. Vincent Gonzalez and Amira Bryant, in recognition of Black August (which honors Black people who have been killed fighting injustice throughout history), said Sunday they had broken fast in order to help the movement in other ways.
Tabin Ibershoff and Ari Maybe are carrying on, though. Their appearance Sunday at a Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression press conference in Louisville's West End was just the third time in the past three weeks that they've strayed far from the Airbnb that's hosting them during their hunger strike, which is being broadcast live around the clock on the group's Hunger Strikers for Breonna Facebook page.
"We don't go out," Ibershoff said Sunday. "It's way too risky with the pandemic and the exhaustion. If we step outside to walk down the street, it's got to be with a friend."
All four people who began the hunger strike on July 21 were at Sunday's press event. They sat together on the steps of the Carl Braden Memorial Center briefly, holding a sign encouraging those watching to call Mayor Greg Fischer's office to demand action against the officers involved in the killing of Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman shot by police executing a no-knock warrant at her apartment in March.
Skipping a couple of meals can be unhealthy. Skipping every meal for three weeks can pose serious risks.
Maybe and Ibershoff have their vitals checked twice a day by medics — "they do a really good job of tracking everything for us," Maybe said — and they need the attention. Both are hypotensive at this point, Ibershoff said, meaning their blood pressure is well below a healthy range. Gonzalez had a blood test taken when he broke fast last week and found that his white blood cell count was low, Ibershoff added, and his hunger strike ended after 15 days.
"There's a lot of concern being expressed from the support team at this point, based on our abilities in our day to day, having spent a lot more time in bed or horizontal," Ibershoff said.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron is still weighing whether to pursue charges against the three officers who fired their weapons when Taylor was killed. He told The Courier Journal last week that his office is waiting on results from the ballistics test the FBI conducted in connection with the shooting.
In the meantime, Ibershoff and Maybe said, there's not a political or medical reason strong enough to convince the pair to end their protest. After three weeks, Ibershoff said finding motivation to continue is the least of her concerns.
"It's like a mind game I play to give me some self-discipline," Ibershoff said. "The hunger, on a normal day, that means I should put some food in my stomach. The hunger for me now means I need to push Greg Fischer to take action."
"If I wasn't motivated to do this, then I wouldn't have signed up for it in the first place," Maybe added.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
$$$
