Will Kentucky take down Davis statue?
Yetter, Deborah
09 June 2020
Confederate soldier John B. Castleman's statue may be gone from its perch overlooking Louisville's Cherokee Park, but the statue of Jefferson Davis, the first and only president of the Confederacy, still stands in the marble Rotunda of the Kentucky Capitol.
At least for now.
Gov. Andy Beshear said Monday he remains committed to removing the statue placed in the Rotunda in 1936 at the urging of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, a monument that has become increasingly controversial in recent years as a symbol of slavery and racism.
"It no longer — to me never — had a place in the Rotunda," Beshear said at a news conference. "I don't think another child should come into this Capitol and look up at a statue of someone who supported slavery."
Earlier Monday, a Beshear spokesman said the administration is working on logistics.
"The governor believes now is the time to remove the statue," Sebastian Kitchen said. "We are working on that now by determining the required steps for moving forward."
Kitchen did not elaborate on what those steps might be.
Beshear initially addressed the matter during a June 4 news conference, where he was asked about the statue as the state and nation continue to be rocked by massive protests over racism and police brutality. In Louisville, large crowds have turned out to remember Breonna Taylor and David McAtee, two black residents shot and killed by police.
"I believe the Jefferson Davis statue is a symbol that divides us, and if there are those who think it's a part of history, there should be a better place to put it in historic context," he said.
On Monday, Louisville awoke to the news that the statue of Castleman atop his horse was being removed after the city won a favorable court ruling Friday. Critics had long sought removal of the statue as a symbol of the Confederacy, and it was the frequent target of paint splatters and graffiti.
Crews began taking down the statue around 6 a.m. and moved it to a storage facility. According to the city, the plan is to place the statue at the nearby Cave Hill Cemetery, where Castleman is buried.
Others who support removal of the Jefferson Davis statue include Kentucky's Black Legislative Caucus, whose nine members on Feb. 28 sent a letter to Beshear urging him to act.
"It is a symbol of bigotry, injustice and a failed ideology," the letter said. "We all know that Davis was a slave owner and a traitor to this nation."
House Democratic leaders, who hold a minority in the chamber, also called for its removal.
"We agree with Gov. Beshear that the Jefferson Davis statue should not be in our Capitol," said the statement from Reps. Joni Jenkins, Derrick Graham and Angie Hatton. "It's past time for it to be moved and someone much more deserving put it his place."
Jonathan Miller, a Lexington lawyer and former state finance secretary, has been advocating for years to have the Jefferson Davis statue removed and replaced with something more appropriate. He would like to see a likeness of Louisville native and boxing great Muhammad Ali, who died in 2016, in the Rotunda.
While his family has said a statute would not be appropriate because Ali's Muslim faith discourages such images as idolatry, a painting or mural could be acceptable, Miller said.
Miller said he thinks the days of Jefferson Davis, a Todd County native, may be near an end at the Capitol, though he hasn't heard anything official.
"I feel really good about that," Miller said. "I think we are closer to it than we've ever been."
Miller, who writes occasional political opinion pieces, has started an online petition in support of Ali as a replacement on his blog, therecoveringpolitician.com.
A previous effort to remove the Jefferson Davis statue failed after the state Historic Properties Commission, which manages state artwork and historic sites, decided against it. Instead, the commission in 2018 simply voted to remove a plaque on the statue that called Davis a patriot and a hero.
Former Gov. Matt Bevin, a Republican, as a candidate had supported removal of the statue but as governor opposed it, saying it would be a "sanitization of history" and that removing Confederate symbols would be "dangerous" because it would encourage people to "pretend it didn't happen."
Beshear, a Democrat who defeated Bevin in his bid for a second term last year, hasn't said whether he plans to ask the commission to revisit the issue.
State law said the commission's 14-member advisory panel has authority over some state properties including the Capitol and "articles placed in the properties." Several members are included by statute because of their jobs, including the director of the Kentucky Heritage Council, with the rest appointed by the governor.
Among the newest members: first lady Britainy Beshear.
Steve Collins, chairman of the commission, did not respond to a request for comment.
The United Daughters of the Confederacy did not immediately respond to a request for comment about the statue it lobbied to have installed in Kentucky at taxpayer expense.
But in a statement on its website, the organization founded in 1894 said it is saddened by controversies over Confederate statues and monuments and "is grieved that certain hate groups have taken the Confederate flag and other symbols as their own."
$$$
