Detective who likely fired fatal shot may retire after threats
Kenning, Chris
30 Sep 2020
While an FBI ballistics lab indicated Cosgrove fired the fatal shot that struck near Taylor's heart, a state ballistics test was inconclusive. Mattingly and Cosgrove remain on administrative reassignment with pay and are awaiting an internal police investigation and an FBI investigation.
Myles Cosgrove, the Louisville Metro Police detective who fired the fatal bullet the night Breonna Taylor died, is seeking to leave the force after receiving threats against his safety, according to a family online fundraising effort.
Cosgrove's family said it's seeking $75,000 to help him buy out the rest of his service time to retire and focus on the safety of his family "that has been put continually at risk over the past few months," it says in a campaign on Givesendgo.com.
"It has recently become clear that it will be impossible for Myles to safely return to his position serving the community with the Louisville Metro Police Department," the family wrote.
As of early Monday afternoon, the page reported it had received $3,465.
Family members did not return The Courier Journal's requests for comment.
After months of protests calling for the involved officers to be charged and arrested, Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron announced last WednesdayCosgrove and another officer, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, acted in self-defense when Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired at them the night she was killed.
Walker has said he mistook police for intruders who burst through the door. Taylor was struck six times and died in her hallway.
Only one officer involved in the shooting — former Detective Brett Hankison, already fired by the department — is facing wanton endangerment charges in state court for shooting into an occupied apartment next to Taylor's.
While an FBI ballistics lab indicated Cosgrove fired the fatal shot that struck near Taylor's heart, a state ballistics test was inconclusive.
Mattingly and Cosgrove remain on administrative reassignment with pay and are awaiting an internal police investigation and an FBI investigation.
"The result of that night was tragic for all involved," Cosgrove's family fundraising page said, calling for people to "listen to each and every one of our city's voices at this cultural moment" in a "safe and rational" conversation amid the outrage and protests.
But it said "safety has proven difficult to come by for Myles and his family and we are, at this point, emotionally concerned for all parties involved."
One of Mattingly's attorneys, Todd McMurtry, confirmed Mattingly's wife last week also posted about threats they've received.
"It has been 114 days since we received a phone call at 11 at night, asking us to pack up our belongings as quickly as possible and leave our home due to corroborated credible threats received and vetted by the FBI that there were active hits on our family. We have been in hiding ever since," she wrote in a post last week.
"Try explaining that to your young child without traumatizing him. Since all of this happened, he has experienced night terrors and so much anxiety that he becomes physically sick. Our adult children have been traumatized and displaced as well. The guilt of moving your in-laws, who are in their 70s, out of their house for their safety is overwhelming. Our lives will never be the same, and all because my husband was shot first while doing his job."
Cosgrove was a former Marine who acted as he was trained, the family said on the page, but had become a target of a "meticulous campaign of disinformation." The page asked people to understand what the family was experiencing.
"Most people simply don't understand what it's like to be a police officer in America today. Most people don't know what it's like, as a career, to put your life on the line on (a) daily basis to simply serve and protect your community. Most people don't know what it's like to have a weapon fired at you," the family wrote.
"Even fewer know what it's like, after all of that, to have the entire world turn on you with pure vitriol for simply performing your job exactly as you were trained to do by your superiors. We ask that you take a moment of empathy to place yourself in that position, think about what it would be like for yourself, and now consider what Myles and his family are going through."
The family alleged media often intentionally had left out important details, though they didn't provide details, and misinformation on social media "resulted in a perpetual, nightmarish reality for Myles and his family" who have received "countless threats."
"Every day, the threats seem more legitimate and scarier; his family has been doxxed and harassed," it said. "Myles' reputation has been completely dismantled and the psychological trauma is something that he will have to cope with for the rest of his life."
An attorney for Cosgrove's family declined to comment Monday. LMPD has said neither he nor Mattingly has filed retirement paperwork.
Misinformation has spread on social media over the months, police have said, such as accusations that officers were at the wrong address, or Taylor was asleep when she was shot.
In August, LMPD said threats had led the department to provide thousands of hours of security outside the officers' homes.
"This has been an emotionally charged time, including hostility directed at Louisville Metro Police officers, including doxing and other threatening cyber-attacks," police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said at the time.
Chris Kenning is an enterprise reporter. Reach him at ckenning@gannett.com, 502-396-3361 or follow on Twitter at @chris_kenning.
While an FBI ballistics lab indicated Cosgrove fired the fatal shot that struck near Taylor's heart, a state ballistics test was inconclusive. Mattingly and Cosgrove remain on administrative reassignment with pay and are awaiting an internal police investigation and an FBI investigation.
Detective Myles Cosgrove is on administrative reassignment.
$$$
