We will expand coverage of race relations
Green, Richard A.
07 June 2020
I wandered through the crowded Kroger parking lot, dodging signs and the crush of people to see firsthand the raucous corner of 26th Street and Broadway.
It was around 6 pm. Monday. Slow-crawling cars on West Broadway blared their horns. The thump-thump-thump of music echoed off buildings. There was laughter, pierced occasionally by a back-and-forth shout of, "No justice. No peace."
I spent about 45 minutes there. I checked in with Courier Journal reporters Phillip M. Bailey and Sarah Ladd, as well as photographer Max Gersh, who drove up from our sister newsroom in Memphis to help with coverage of Louisville's challenging week of peaceful protests, occasional clashes with police and last Friday night's vandalism and downtown looting.
As I headed back to my SUV in the crowded lot, I made eye contact with a man, maybe in his early 30s, wearing a Black Lives Matter T-shirt, near an ATM machine. It was obvious he had spotted my Courier Journal ID in a lanyard around my neck.
"You with the paper?" asked the man who said his name was Terrelle. I could sense his suspicion of my presence.
"Yes," I replied, introducing myself. I was in the West End to see what was going on and to visit my reporting team, I explained. We talked for a minute, maybe two, about the busy scene, the teeming crowd and the sorrowful events that thrust Louisville into the national spotlight since Thursday, May 28.
Across the street from where we stood, one of the West End's most beloved figures had been killed just 18 hours earlier. David McAtee was a 53-year-old barbecue operator described by friends, family, even city officials as a pillar of the West End. He often fed police, greeting them with bear hugs, big smiles and plates of free food.
Late Sunday night, May 31, Louisville Metro Police Department officers and National Guard troops rushed into the crowded gathering spot next to YaYa's BBQ in an apparent bid to enforce the city's 9 p.m. curfew. Video shows there were no protesters; no massive demonstration.
Police contend McAtee fired a gun outside his business door shortly after midnight Monday.
Officers and/or troopers responded with a hail of at least 18 bullets. One struck McAtee in the chest, killing him.
A Kentucky State Police investigation is digging into what unfolded that tragic night, a stunning twist to a painful series of days that began with peaceful protests of those angry about the death of Breonna Taylor, killed by Louisville police in a shooting in her South End apartment.
Even after sharing a video with the public after McAtee's death, interim Police Chief Robert Schroeder acknowledged, "the video does not provide all the answers."
Which brings me back to Terrelle. "What can I do for you?" I asked, as we prepared to part ways.
He paused. Maybe for a split second. "Just one thing," he replied.
"Tell our story. We need someone to tell our story."
And then he slipped away to meet friends toting a big case of water bottles and perhaps late-evening provisions — a plastic container of cut-up carrots and celery with ranch dressing.
I've thought often about Terrelle this past week as The Courier Journal has dispatched reporters, videographers, photographers and columnists to chronicle the chaotic and emotional days on Louisville's streets and sidewalks since that first protest parade through downtown on the sun-splashed afternoon of May 28.
We've captured the anger and the pleas for justice, equity and change. Protesters want an end to institutional racism. They demand, and appropriately so, that police — in Louisville, Minneapolis and every other city in America — stop killing African Americans.
We also were there May 29 when peaceful demonstrations erupted into a late-night rampage of vandalism, looting, fires and smashed windows.
For all of the wonderful qualities of Louisville — and there are many I've learned in my two years here — it's also a city scarred by deep, longstanding racial divisions.
History bears that out: Kentucky's inhumane role in the slave trade; its support for the Confederacy despite a declaration of neutrality in the Civil War; the painful segregation of our schools and the riotous response to busing; and the discriminatory lending patterns known as redlining that left those in minority neighborhoods of Louisville, including the West End, significantly disadvantaged in terms of property value and accumulation of wealth.
Our commonwealth was one of three states that rejected President Lincoln's successful Jan. 31, 1865, passage of the 13th Amendment that ensured freedom for enslaved Kentuckians. Ratification did not come until March 18, 1976, making Kentucky the 49th state to acknowledge slavery's end.
The Courier Journal turns 152 in November and has used its pages at various times in our history to champion civil rights. We've been far from perfect (a topic for a future column), but we have consistently denounced discrimination and inequality.
In 1975, for example, The Courier Journal was the target of violent protests because of our editorial board's support of school busing in Jefferson County.
Our position led to the cancellation of 3,500 subscriptions, but the newspaper and Louisville Times wrote a jaw-dropping 1,200 stories on school integration that year. It also published 330 photographs, including one rare moment of racial harmony: A photo that showed a black boy and white boy, both 8, shaking hands at Greenwood Elementary School. It won a Pulitzer Prize for feature photography in 1976.
Put simply: We are obliged to tirelessly, thoughtfully and fairly examine what is happening here when it comes to matters of race, unrest and inequity.
In the near future, I will tell you of a reporting team assigned to delve into those divisions that threaten to rip our community apart. Of course, we will continue to follow protesters and capture their voices, but our coverage will go well beyond the emotions of the moment and attempts by some to find common ground and reconciliation.
Important questions must be asked related to policing, our politicians, city policies and historical barriers to economic growth.
We cannot erase 400 years of racial inequality, generations of discrimination and decades of doubt about those charged with protecting the lives of citizens — all citizens.
But we will do exactly what Terrelle asked me to do last Monday night related to his African American friends and neighbors: We're going to tell your story.
It starts Sunday with a new summer-long series by intern Quintez Brown, a University of Louisville student who will introduce readers to those who live and work in the West End, where he was born and raised.
Stay tuned for more details of additional and deeper coverage. And, as always, thanks for reading The Courier Journal.
$$$
