'We know how to fight'
Loosemore, Bailey
26 July 2020
They've been arrested.They've paid to bail others out of jail.They've led marches through Louisville's streets and distributed food to people in need.They've drafted policy changes, disrupted news conferences and, through seven weeks of protests, stayed on message.They want justice for Breonna Taylor.They're Black women who've had enough.
Across Louisville, dozens of Black women are stepping into leadership positions as part of the movement for racial justice that's sweeping the nation.
Many of them have been working to improve civil rights for years. But some are part of a new generation of young activists who've reignited a flame in seasoned organizers who want to see them thrive.
Each woman has her own role to play. But together, they've formed a grassroots network that encourages and leans on each other, holds one another accountable and keeps pressure on people in power.
"We know how to negotiate, we know how to fight, we know how to strategize, we know how to lead, we know how to listen to each other," said Talesha Wilson, a 27-year-old community organizer. "It's really a disservice to this whole entire country and this world to not listen to Black women."
Historically, Black women have been pivotal to civil rights movements — caring for children, organizing transportation, keeping people fed, said Keturah Herron, a policy strategist with the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky.
It's just in their nature, she said, to bear the burden and get the work done. But they often don't get the respect they deserve.
In Louisville, Black women leaders are starting to gain more recognition for their labors, as they collectively challenge systemic racism in the wake of the fatal police shooting of Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman killed during a failed narcotics investigation at her apartment in March.
Herron said seeing their work lifted up is exciting.
"But at the same time, it's unfortunate it came at the cost of another Black woman losing her life to police brutality," she said.
For many of the women, Taylor's death hit hard. They saw themselves in the young emergency room technician who just wanted to enjoy her life and take care of people, Wilson said.
"Every day we are working to heal other people and to help other people, and she was doing that and her life was taken," she said.
But Taylor's death also reminds the women why they've committed their lives to grassroots organizing — a career that often doesn't bring wealth or acknowledgement.
"I understand as a Black woman, I can't just advocate for myself," said Nannie Croney, a boutique owner and board president of Change Today, Change Tomorrow, a nonprofit that provides resources for Black and marginalized communities.
"I carry the burden of my entire race. I carry everyone with me. I carry the mothers, the grandmothers, the sisters, the brothers, the cousins. ... And I know the power my voice has, so therefore I have to be vocal for those that can't speak."
Taylor Ryan, the founder of Change Today, Change Tomorrow, said everyone has a part to play in the racial justice movement, whether that's on the front lines or behind the scenes.
People calling council members to demand policy changes are just as important as those who have continuously occupied Jefferson Square Park, she said.
"There are so many components that have to work together to advance the movement, and if we're all out here trying to be on the front lines with a loudspeaker, it's not going to work," she said.
Khalilah Collins, a Louisville organizer who's since moved to New Orleans, said with Black women leading from every angle, the city is in capable hands.
"They're all brilliant, smart, strategic, but they're also loving and caring," she said of local activists like Bail Project manager Shameka Parrish-Wright, writer and poet Hannah Drake and Black Lives Matter organizer Chanelle Helm. "It takes all those things. They actually embody the change we want to see."
Ari Tulay, 19, said she's been inspired and supported by the women.
After she was arrested one night during the protests, her mother called Drake to see how the well-connected poet could help.
"It feels like someone has your back in a way that a lot of times our community doesn't feel like that," Tulay said. "... Having those people that you can look up to, but who are there too. It's not like Hannah is this figure head who you can't touch and can't see. She's running around Louisville, she's doing what she needs to do.
"There are some really powerful women in our city, in Louisville. ... It's amazing to be in the room with them. It's amazing to have community with them."
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: https://www.courier-journal.com/baileyl.
Women of the Movement
Read more about the women fighting for change. Eight of them tell their stories in this week's Forum section. 1E
Top row, from left to right: Hannah Drake, Chanelle Helm, Keturah Herron and Shameka Parrish-Wright. Bottom row, from left to right: Taylor Ryan, Imani Smith,
Tyra Walker and Talesha Wilson.
Photos by Jeff Faughender and michael clevenger/Courier Journal
A portrait of Breonna Taylor, made by local artist Jaylin Stewart, is projected onto Metro Hall during a protest in Louisville on June 5.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Marchers carry signs during the Youth March for Freedom held on July 4 in downtown Louisville.
$$$
