Kentucky sees new high in average number of new virus cases
Sonka, Joe
10 June 2020
FRANKFORT — Kentucky's seven-day rolling average of new COVID-19 cases reached a new high of 226 on Saturday, making the commonwealth one of 14 states to hit a similar record in the same time period beginning June 1.
While the new peak in cases brought alarm as more states have continued to reopen their economies amid the pandemic, Kentucky's seven-day average dropped to 184 by Monday, after reporting low totals of 70 and 120 in the following two days.
On Tuesday, though, Gov. Andy Beshear announced 245 new COVID-19 cases, leading the seven-day rolling average to creep back up to 219.
Announcing the COVID-19 case totals at his daily press conference on Monday evening, Beshear cautioned that it was too soon to give a full conclusion about recent numbers, noting that testing capacity has dramatically increased the rate of positive tests and hospital beds are far from capacity.
Some states where COVID-19 numbers increased over the past week have sounded the alarm, such in Arizona, whose state health director sent a letter to hospitals urging them to "fully activate" emergency plans, preparing for crisis care and suspending elective surgeries if there is a shortage of staff or bed capacity.
Beshear said 9.7% of tests came back positive during the week of May 4, opposed to 2.93% of tests last week when positive cases rose. Still, last week's positive rate was higher than the 2.56% rate the previous week and the 2.07% rate the week before that.
The governor noted that as the economy continues to reopen, "the extra contacts that people have — maybe getting out for Memorial Day and other extra contacts — is creating more cases.
"Now, those cases are still in a certain range that is manageable, but we will have to be watching what happens as that continues," Beshear said.
Asked if he still feels comfortable with his reopening strategy considering the rise in new cases last week, Beshear said that he is, "but we are very carefully monitoring this."
"We're gonna see more positives," Beshear said. "We're going to see more positives because people are having more contacts. Now, I do worry that some aren't taking it as seriously as we should."
The governor added that looking at just the overall number of new cases "probably isn't the most important analysis," as his administration focuses on hospitalization rates and the number of patients housed in an intensive care unit. "That ICU number, if it does significantly go up, then we're really gonna have to ... that's when we really have to look at things," Beshear said.
Statistics and hospitalizations and ICU admission have remained relatively constant in recent weeks.
Beshear said Tuesday that 75 patients with COVID-19 are currently in an ICU in Kentucky. He said that number has "hovered very low" recently, meaning "if people get very, very sick from this virus, there is room for them."
Though he did not specifically mention the thousands of people across Kentucky who have participated in marches and protests in honor of Breonna Taylor and other African Americans killed by police in recent months, Beshear did mention that "a significant portion" of new cases are from Louisville, the epicenter of those protests.
Beshear said that as people have more contacts, they need to comply with guidance on social distancing and masking in order to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. He added specifically that "if you've been in a large group in the recent past, get tested. For your safety, and for others."
"If people are unwilling to do those things, it makes it less safe," Beshear said. "So the more people out there that wear masks, the safer we are. The more people that engage in social distancing, the safer we are. The more people that have decided that they're over it, it makes it harder."
$$$
