Online streamers dealing with hate speech, threats
Gardner, Hayes; Loosemore, Bailey
06 Sep 2020
At seemingly every Breonna Taylor protest event, there is someone following the action and sharing an uncut video stream on social media, allowing interested people from all over Kentucky and beyond to tune in.
Many people are grateful for the window into the movement.
But not all.
"That's probably been the most difficult part, dealing with all the bigotry," said Jared Wright, who streams under the name "Riotheart." "We're constantly being berated by people on the other side of the movement — even some people within the movement."
Antonio "T-Made" Taylor, the founder of WAVE FM Radio, said one goal of livestreaming is to create a conversation, which can help everyone reach the roots of social justice issues.
The livestreamers are generally supportive of the protesters and their goals, and they're often vocal on their streams, which some viewers have responded to with antagonizing comments and even hate speech, as Donovan Hobson, who goes by "SmoothVue," said he has experienced.
"I deal with racist comments a lot. They come to my streams, and I'm fine with it," he said. "But by the time you leave, you're gonna be mad because what you came to see, you're not going to see it. You're not going to get to see the negative that you were expecting to see."
Chris Jones is a Report For America fellow who covers white supremacy groups in Appalachia. His work has led him to Louisville on a few occasions, and he often follows protests via livestreams — both local streamers and national ones, like Unicorn Riot.
The groups he covers often share links to livestreams with each other, which can lead to members bombarding the host with hateful comments.
"It's very, very common," Jones said. "It's so normal that you just stop seeing it after awhile."
The chatter often simply opposes the Black Lives Matter movement, but sometimes it is threatening.
"You see this general interest and a desire for violence against protesters. It's very much intending to be threatening," Jones said.
Jason Downey, a regular livestreamer in Louisville, does not mince words when interacting with the right-wing militias who openly oppose the Breonna Taylor protests. He's happy to engage in arguments with them on the stream.
"I receive a lot of threats, especially (with) my heavy speaking out against the American Freedom Fighters, the Three Percenters," he said.
In response to the threats, Downey sometimes wears a bulletproof vest and carries a gun. Tara Bassett, a longtime TV and radio personality who now consistently livestreams, said some commenters have threatened to kill her dogs. She carries a gun now, too.
Attending the protests can be dangerous. After Louisville photographer Tyler Gerth was fatally shot in late June, one livestreamer took 20 days off as he waited for a bulletproof vest to arrive. But that, nor the threats, have deterred streamers like Bassett.
"I said to my colleagues, 'If there's something worth dying for, it's what we're doing now,'" Bassett said. "I said to one of the organizers, 'If I get shot, for god's sake, pick up my camera and keep streaming so at least my death is worth something.'"
$$$
