Tough questions addressed in Courier Journal On Kentucky Politics listening session
Gregory, Kathryn
11 June 2020
America is more polarized and divided into tribal groups now than any time since the 1960s. What is the role of a newspaper like The Courier Journal in addressing and improving these divisions in American society?
That was just one of many questions posed to The Courier Journal's team of political reporters, including Joe Sonka and Deborah Yetter, columnist Joe Gerth and political editor Robert J. Byers during Tuesday's virtual On Kentucky Politics listening session held via Zoom.
The free virtual event brought together about 25 people to discuss everything from the Breonna Taylor shooting and subsequent Black Lives Matters protests in Louisville to defunding the police department as well as absentee ballots and voter education ahead of the June primary and more.
This was the first virtual event in a series of listening sessions The Courier Journal has held since 2019 to help prepare people for the primary and November election, when President Donald Trump and Sen. Mitch McConnell are up for reelection.
The hourlong conversation, led by Courier Journal Community Impact Director Veda Morgan, also touched on additional training for police officers when encountering people with mental health issues, proposed school board tax increases, purging voter rolls, state Senate races and getting broadband internet access to all 120 Kentucky counties.
While the topics varied, an overarching theme was the role local news media plays in educating the public about these issues, particularly race relations.
"Race relations is an incredibly entangled conversation. I believe our job is to pull strands out and lay it out as thoughtfully and quickly as we can over the next few weeks," Courier Journal Editor Rick Green said. "Our coverage will not be confined to those who've marched and continue to march. We will continue to monitor that, but our conversations need to be deeper and more thoughtful than that."
Participant Joanie Prentice weighed in on the defunding police narrative and said it will become a "hot-button political issue" that will create a lot of division.
$$$
