Lawyer sues Fischer, LMPD, others over tear gas incident at protest
Ladd, Sarah; Tobin, Ben
17 Aug 2020
Attorney Dave Johnson is suing Louisville police, Mayor Greg Fischer and other officials over allegations that he, as a bystander at the second night of Breonna Taylor protests in late May, was hit with tear gas.
The federal lawsuit, filed Aug. 11 in the U.S. District Court in the Western District of Kentucky, also names Louisville Metro Government, interim Louisville Metro Police Chief Robert Schroeder, Assistant Chief Lavita Chavous and unnamed police officers.
According to the lawsuit, Johnson and a friend met in downtown Louisville on May 29 "to take photographs and observe" the protest "for personal informative and social journalistic purposes, as well as for potential legal purposes." Neither person demonstrated in the protest, the lawsuit said.
Johnson was looking for his friend around 9 p.m. outside of the Louisville Metro Department of Corrections when police officers "started indiscriminately and recklessly firing flash bang grenades and tear gas canisters into the crowd of protesters, press, and bystanders without any audible warning whatsoever," according to the lawsuit.
After running away, Johnson was "specifically targeted" by police around 9:30 p.m. as a tear gas canister landed right in front of him at Muhammad Ali Boulevard, the lawsuit alleges, adding that police fired off more tear gas canisters as he tried to run away.
Johnson then hid in a business doorway as he "suffered from breathlessness, burning eyes, disorientation, anxiety, and fear," according to the lawsuit.
He eventually found his friend, ran away from more officers firing tear gas canisters and flash-bang grenades and drove home, the lawsuit continues.
Johnson woke up the next day "with a headache and dried blood in his eyes from LMPD's tear gas."
The lawsuit claims that the police's use of tear gas is "technically unlawful chemical warfare as defined by 'The Geneva Protocol' of 1925 that the United States of America agreed to adhere to, by treaty, with many other nations."
The lawsuit also alleges that the defendants violated the Fourth and Fourteenth amendments of the U.S. Constitution as well as a couple of sections of the Kentucky Constitution.
Johnson is asking a judge to enjoin Fischer and police from "the indiscriminate and intentional or reckless use of crowd control weaponry on large crowds" and to award punitive damages against several of the defendants, among other things.
A representative from Fischer's office did not immediately reply to a request for comment. LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington said "we cannot comment on pending litigation."
This isn't the first legal action of its kind.
On Aug. 3, a Louisville man sued the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office after a deputy was caught on video spraying his face with pepper spray from behind the Hall of Justice doors. Kejohn Jennings, 22, said he went with a few friends up to the Sixth Street side doors of the courthouse during a protest on July 10 and asked to be let in to use the restroom, but a deputy locked the door and then pepper-sprayed him.
On July 31, the NAACP and the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky filed a federal lawsuit against the Louisville Metro Police, saying the department has repeatedly used force and intimidation against peaceful protesters in the city.
In early July, state Rep. Attica Scott announced the Louisville Metro Police Department was investigating her complaint of getting pushed by an LMPD officer and hit with tear gas during one of the first nights of downtown protests in late May.
Following protests in late May and early June, LMPD revised its policy on use of tear gas. Schroeder, the interim chief, announced on June 10 that police would no longer deploy the stinging chemical unless the chief approves of it first.
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Protesters get out of the way of police using tear gas and paintball guns to disperse crowds on Jefferson Street on May 29.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
A tear gas can explodes near protesters May 31, during the fourth night of protests over the death of Breonna Taylor.
$$$
