Kentucky bars make changes to prepare for Monday's grand reopening
Ghabour, Dahlia
29 June 2020 
"I'm seeing retail and restaurants close downtown rapidly. It's looking grim."
Olivia Griffin
Owner of the Limbo Tiki Bar
For the first time since mid-March, Louisville residents will be able to stop at their favorite neighborhood bar for a drink. Gov. Andy Beshear will allow bars to reopen to customers at 33% capacity on Monday after months of a shutdown to stem the spread of the coronavirus pandemic.
Just like restaurants, every bar owner is handling the reopening differently. Some bars that also serve food were able to open alongside restaurants in the days and weeks since May 22 when Beshear lifted his first round of restrictions.
Some are only serving patrons on outdoor patios, while others have seating available inside dining rooms, too. Some are allowing a few guests to sit at the bar, while others have the bars closed down and servers bringing drinks to tables instead.
Bar owners are implementing these practices with caution. Record numbers of new COVID-19 cases were recorded around much of the county as states continued to reopen bars and restaurants, and the U.S. has reported more than 125,000 coronavirus-related deaths.
Kalyn Wise-Guy, taproom manager and bartender at Akasha Brewing, 909 E. Market St. in NuLu, said the bar reopened a few weeks ago for its patio and recently opened the taproom, though guests can't sit at the bar. A higher capacity allowance in a month or so won't help, she said — not while the 6-foot social distance rule is still in effect.
"We're keeping our hours shortened because we don't really know how to push business without encouraging people to also come in," she said. "We're not having live music or anything. Just keeping it real chill to not overwhelm everybody ... and it's already been kind of overwhelming with just two bartenders trying to juggle all the shifts."
The Limbo Tiki Bar at 411 W. Chestnut St. in downtown Louisville reopened on May 22, then closed up again when the protests against the police shooting of Breonna Taylor took over downtown at the end of that month.
"I'm seeing retail and restaurants close downtown rapidly," said owner Olivia Griffin. "It's looking grim. Without festivals and conventions for the next year, businesses downtown are going to have a hard time surviving. Especially if locals aren't working or coming downtown."
Ted Mitzlaff, CEO of Goodwood Brewing Co., said the Louisville brewery at 636 E. Main St. reopened on May 22, closed briefly during the protests then reopened. Inside and outside seating is available spaced out and bar seating will be added in spaced-out groups of two once Goodwood is allowed to operate at 50% capacity, Mitzlaff said.
During the shutdown, Goodwood Brewing moved its offices upstairs and doubled the square footage of the taproom from about 3,000 to 6,000 square feet.
"The capacity restrictions don't affect us as much because we're a large facility," Mitzlaff said. "But for small taprooms and bars, I don't see how they can make any money if it's a small footprint and they can only have a third of customers. The math doesn't work."
Nouvelle Bar & Bottle at 214 S. Clay St., also in NuLu, is one bar that fell into the gray area: because it has a food permit, the bar could reopen in May. After waiting out the first wave of opening, owner Scott Justice reopened Nouvelle on June 2 for patio seating only, hoping to "create some type of experience."
Nouvelle's indoor space is completely shut down, with the front doors turned into an order and pickup station.
"It doesn't feel as close-knit," Justice said. "You go to a bar and a place like ours to experience a sense of community and communion and it's hard to get that same feeling when everything is 6 feet away from everything else."
Across the country, bars are becoming a common source of coronavirus outbreaks. In Louisiana, at least 100 people tested positive for the virus after visiting bars in the Tigerland district, which is popular with Louisiana State University students. Amid record numbers of new coronavirus infections — 39,972 new daily cases —Texas Gov. Greg Abbott and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis ordered bars closed again on Thursday.
On Saturday, Kentucky announced 316 new cases of COVID-19, and Sunday saw 67 more new cases, bringing the state's total to more than 15,000 since March 6, the day the first case was reported.
Every bar is different, but part of the reason they're so risky is the common style of dark, narrow indoor spaces with no windows and little room to move around.
Bars often have fixed barstool seating and a layout that encourages customers to gather in clusters, as reported in the New York Times. And long conversations in close contact are thought to play a large part in transmissions of viruses. Research shows people can release up to 10 times more particles through speech than a cough.
Justice said out of an abundance of caution, he is not planning to reopen Nouvelle's dining room until the "trajectory of COVID-19 infections is consistently going down."
"All the guidance says that the risk of infection outside is substantially lower than indoors, and we're fortunate to have a very large outdoor patio space," he said.
ShopBar at 950 Barret Ave. in Germantown is also counting on its patio space: during the shutdown, owners Natasha Sud and Gerald Dickerson had a pergola built over the 1,500-square-foot outdoor patio and launched a partnership with Farm to Fork Catering for food service.
The two opened ShopBar in September and were counting on "patio season" to kick the business into gear after a slow winter. But that never happened.
"We put everything we had into ShopBar to open," Sud said. "People said 'you guys are going to kill it in spring.' We wanted to milk it because we still have a lot of things to pay off since we just opened."
Preparations for ShopBar's reopening have been full swing: the bar and order counters have large sneeze guards and masks are "absolutely mandatory" when guests are inside or walking around, Sud said. Staff will have masks and gloves on and ShopBar even hired a "doorman" to keep track of guests and make sure the patio doesn't get too crowded.
Sud said after she and her fiance visited other bars around Louisville, they decided to allow two sets of seats at their bar, significantly spaced apart. Still, she knows they can't control everything — like what guests will do when they see people they know.
"We had a few drinks at a bar last night and saw three groups of people we know very well," she said. "We talked about how much we wanted to hug each other. It's hard. It's just trying to create a fun, social atmosphere that's still safe."
Dahlia Ghabour: 502-582-4497; dghabour@gannett.com; Twitter: @dghabour. Support strong journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe
"I'm seeing retail and restaurants close downtown rapidly. It's looking grim."
Olivia Griffin
Owner of the Limbo Tiki Bar
Inside and outside seating is available spaced out at Goodwood Brewing Company.
Marty Pearl/Special to Courier Journal
Natasha Sud with Shop Bar waters the plants outside the Barrett Avenue establishment Thursday as preparations are made for reopening.
$$$
