AG speaks to one side at White House
Bailey, Phillip M.
14 June 2020
Republican Attorney General Daniel Cameron seems satisfied with only speaking to one side of the police debate echoing through America's cities.
The attorney general's office – rightfully, in most minds – is being tight-lipped about what he thinks or will do about the Louisville police officers who shot Breonna Taylor to death.
A Cameron spokeswoman told On Politics on Thursday it is the attorney general's understanding that Louisville police "will be concluding their (internal) investigation in the short term," meaning they still haven't finished.
Cameron, meanwhile, was giving rank-and-file cops a wink from the White House this week at a roundtable led by President Donald Trump.
"I'm so thankful for the men and women of our law enforcement community that recognize the importance and sincerity of that need, and have the interest not only to protect and serve, but also to demonstrate understanding of the challenges and look for ways to heal the fabric of this nation," he said in the Monday video tweet zipped out by the White House.
This isn't surprising given how Cameron ran for attorney general during the 2019 campaign. He talked about partnerships with sheriffs, police departments and prosecutors as much as opposing abortion and the historic nature of his candidacy.
Looking at the White House transcript, however, Kentucky's first Black attorney general said little about what African Americans are experiencing or demanding when it comes to policing.
Cameron, in to the clip, did allude to how, when it comes to policing, those in the room, such as U.S. Attorney General William Barr, must look for ways to "do it better." He then made a passing piggyback on Barr's comments speaking to the "challenge that, frankly, Black and brown communities have had."
The Trump administration paraded plenty of African American conservatives in front of the camera this week who, while opposing COVID-19 restrictions as unconstitutional, praised the president's law-and-order posture and offered no comment on threats to use military might to quell protests.
Up until the White House roundtable, Cameron had done a good job of staying above the fray, while Louisville Democrats are being torched by left-leaning activists for their handling of the Taylor case.
Democrats would love to have a conservative scapegoat to share some of the heat.
Mayor Greg Fischer, if you noticed, held a press conference with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who used that pulpit to explicitly call out Cameron to prosecute the three officers who killed Taylor.
This is starting to resonate with protesters in the streets, who are wondering if Cameron can be unbiased when it comes to the cops.
When the Monday White House meeting ended, the attorney general continued with the police pep talk.
"My elected position has given me the opportunity to witness first-hand the dedication of our law enforcement community in Kentucky," Cameron said in a statement. "Our men and women in uniform have a desire not only to serve and protect all our communities, but also understand them. I am hopeful that sentiment will help propel our commonwealth forward in the days to come."
The attorney general did remark in glowing terms that Kentucky is "at a crossroad, and our humanity beckons us to leave behind the status quo and move forward together toward change."
But Cameron hasn't offered even the vaguest of idea – as the state's chief law enforcement officer – on what sort of changes he thinks need to be made that speak to "people who look like (him)," as he often noted on the campaign trail.
On several occasions during the campaign, Cameron told On Politics that being the first Black attorney general was important because it could be a bridge between racial minorities and law enforcement agencies.
All that came out of the White House visit was face time with Trump, who graciously referred to Cameron as a "superstar in the making" when introducing him to the roundtable, according to the White House transcript.
"But he had an incredible race, and we watched it together," the president said. "And congratulations on that. That was some evening, right?"
"Thank you, Mr. President," Cameron said. "It was."
$$$
