UK's Keion Brooks talks injustice, value of voting
Saxon, Jonathan
29 Aug 2020
"I'm a Black male. And at times I feel like we're being hunted."
Keion Brooks Jr.
Sophomore forward for Kentucky
In a continuation of athletes speaking out against injustice nationwide, a University of Kentucky basketball player took time to share his thoughts on what's happening in the country. Sophomore forward Keion Brooks Jr. held a Zoom call on Friday afternoon and opened the call with words of support for Jacob Blake, Breonna Taylor and their families.
"I want to push my prayers out to Jacob Blake and his family," he said. "I'm praying for justice for Breonna Taylor and her family."
Blake, a 29-year-old Black man, is paralyzed from the waist down after police shot him seven times in the back in Kenosha, Wisconsin, on Sunday. Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency room technician, was shot and killed by police on March 13 in her Louisville apartment.
Brooks is a member of the National Association of Basketball Coaches (NABC) Player Development Coalition and the SEC Council on Racial Equality and Social Justice. Both organizations are looking to use the influence of sports to address social justice issues, and Brooks jumped at the chance to use his position as a Kentucky basketball player for positive change.
"When coach Cal (head coach John Calipari) presented me with the opportunity of being on the coalition, I thought it was a great idea," he said. "It's about player empowerment (and) teaching players you're not just a basketball player. You have a voice, a platform and a right to use it. I feel like players' voices aren't being heard as much as they should. The players are the NCAA at the end of the day. We're the ones going out there sacrificing our bodies. With the coalition, we can educate athletes to let them know they're more than just a person that plays their sport."
His call comes one day after the Kentucky and Western Kentucky football teams chose to walk out of practice to protest Blake's shooting. Brooks admitted that it scares him to think about the shootings of Black citizens across the country, and he wonders if he could have found himself in one of the victim's shoes.
"I'm a Black male," he said. "And at times I feel like we're being hunted. When it really hit me, there was a time where I cut my hair. I was just holding my phone one day, and when the phone is on the lock screen you can see a reflection of yourself. I looked at my reflection, and I thought, 'Wow, I kind of look like George Floyd right now.' It made me realize that could have been me. Could've been my brother. Could've been one of my teammates. It just made me want to do more to do what I can to help."
Brooks lauded the football team's walk out of practice and said such actions get people's attention and that's how you start. He added it was also important to have a plan of follow up actions so that goodwill and momentum aren't wasted. "I'm a believer in once you get their attention, you have to follow that up with something," said Brooks. "You can't just take that stand and then not have plans of action to go forward. I really like what the football team did, and I can't wait to see what they do next."
Brooks said his thoughts have been all over the place, but he has tried to stay even-keeled during this time so he can do his part to curb injustice. One such way is exercising his voting rights, which has been a major point of emphasis for Calipari.
"Coach Cal explained to us that the first action we can take, that's guaranteed, is we can vote," said Brooks. "Go to the polls or get our absentee ballot, and we can make a difference. That's one (thing) we know for sure we have the power to do."
Brooks understands that not everyone will agree with what he and other athletes across the country are doing in standing up, speaking out and demonstrating for what they believe in. But he and others aren't content to just play ball and pretend like people aren't being killed in the street. He won't just "shut up and dribble."
"I think people have a difficult time separating the athlete from the sport that they play," he said. "Just because I represent Kentucky basketball, that does not mean I'm not a person who has morals, values, and views on certain things. We have strong views on topics just like the fans do, and they just want us to go out there, entertain them for an hour or two and just shut up. I don't see why they would think that way. That's not going to work. That's not how this is. I'm praying for them (and) hopefully they can see change."
"I'm a Black male. And at times I feel like we're being hunted."
Keion Brooks Jr.
Sophomore forward for Kentucky
$$$
