What to know about the group that organized 'BreonnaCon'
Tobin, Ben; Mencarini, Matt
25 Aug 2020
More than five months after the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor, a four-day "community convention" in her honor, featuring workshops, a school supplies giveaway and a faith revival wrapped up this week.
The event, called "BreonnaCon," was organized by Until Freedom, a New York-based group that has temporarily relocated to Louisville.
Until Freedom has been actively advocating for justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old Black emergency room technician who was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro Police officers fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a no-knock warrant as part of a narcotics investigation.
Here's what you should know about the group:
What else have they done in Kentucky? In June, Until Freedom organized a more than 500-person march at the Kentucky state Capitol in Frankfort to demand justice for Taylor. The rally included Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, actress Jada Pinkett Smith, hip-hop star Common and rapper Rapsody.
In July, more than 100 protesters marched to Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's home in Louisville to demand he criminally charge the officers involved in the shooting.
The protest led to the arrests of 87 protesters — all of whom are facing felony charges for intimidating a participant in a legal process, according to Louisville Metro Police.
The group has also been involved in smaller rallies, like the one that included the family of Michael Brown, whose death sparked the Black Lives Matter movement. And the organization helped organize the distribution 2,000 boxes of free food in Taylor's honor.
What is Until Freedom's mission? Who are the group's members? Based in New York, Until Freedom focuses on "investing in those who are the most directly impacted by cyclical poverty, inequality and state violence," according to its website.
"We are a clearinghouse for advocates, new & budding activists, seasoned community organizers, students, movement lawyers, entertainers and artists, policy experts, formerly & currently incarcerated individuals, and survivors of gun violence to work linearly to uplift all of our people," the website reads.
The organization, founded in 2019, has held rallies across the country on issues ranging from police brutality to prison reform. As was the case in Louisville, the group seeks to work with local activists on the ground as well as bring in people from outside of the area.
Who are the leaders of Until Freedom? The four co-founders of Until Freedom are Linda Sarsour and Tamika Mallory, both co-chairs of the 2017 Women's March on Washington; Mysonne Linen, a hip-hop artist and criminal justice reform activist; and Angelo Pinto, a movement lawyer.
All four were arrested and charged following the rally at Cameron's home in July.
What's the view of Until Freedom from Louisville residents? Sadiqa Reynolds, president and CEO of the Louisville Urban League, said she met many of the founders of Until Freedom when she attended the Women's March in Washington, D.C.
She said the group has been a positive force during protests surrounding the Taylor case and emphasized that it's a peaceful protesting organization.
"They're professional protesters. They're activists, but they're paying attention," she said. "And I think what they bring to Louisville that's important for us to acknowledge is this attention, because we're the city that hasn't yet dealt with the situation with Breanna Taylor.
"And so because we are still waiting to find out if there will be charges filed at all, because it took so long for even one officer to be terminated, they came to say, 'You know we're going to stand with this mother.' And that's what I've seen them doing so."
Reynolds added that the group has talked about issues beyond Taylor, including voter registration, census participation and food insecurity.
She acknowledged the desire for local advocates to be able to push for significant changes in their own communities.
"You want to be able to say, we did this, you know, we were able to get justice in our city," Reynolds said. "And unfortunately, in this case, we need the support (from outside the state). I have not seen them stepping on toes. What I have seen is them bring together a lot of different organizations."
But some have had different views.
Maliya Homer, president of the Black Student Union at the University of Louisville, is one person who's been critical of the organization's presence in Kentucky, starting with a rally organized by the group in Frankfort earlier this summer.
Homer was not able to attend the rally but said friends who did told her Until Freedom was unprepared for the large crowd that showed up, lacking the supplies, medical volunteers and security needed to keep participants safe.
"What they did was they brought these celebrities in from out of town during a pandemic without asking us what resources we need," Homer said. "... There were folks passing out from heat stroke. It was not good."
Homer said she's not upset by Until Freedom coming in to local organizers' "turf," she just wishes the group had better engaged people who've been lifting up Taylor's name since she was killed at her home in March.
"You don't just come to people's city and do actions," Homer said, referencing Until Freedom's demonstration at Cameron's home in July. "You just do not do that. That's dangerous and disrespectful. I think it's being allowed and encouraged because it (involves) celebrities. That's not what transformative justice looks like."
What have they done outside of Kentucky? The group's activism didn't start with the Taylor case.
In October 2019, Until Freedom helped organize rallies around the country as part a "Day of Outrage" to protest police killings of Black men and women.
The events took place the same month that Atatiana Jefferson, a Fort Worth, Texas, woman shot and killed by police while she was in her home. Aaron Dean, the police officer who killed Jefferson, was charged with murder and resigned from the department.
In July, Until Freedom and two other organizations took out a full-page ad in The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel calling on the local prosecutor to charge police officer Joseph Mensah.
Mensah shot and killed Alvin Cole, a 17-year-old from Milwaukee, in February in the parking lot of a Cheesecake Factory restaurant in Wauwatosa, Wisconsin. It was his third fatal shooting in the last five years. Mensah was suspected with pay and an investigation remains open, according to The Journal Sentinel.
Why did Until Freedom first come to Louisville? Sarsour, a co-founder of Until Freedom, said in July that the group came to Louisville because the city "is going to be the capital of America when it comes to justice for those who are being slain."
"I want you to know that what you're doing has literal ripple effects in every city in America," Sarsour said.
In an interview with The Courier Journal, Sarsour said that she has been an organizer against police brutality for roughly 15 years and that "Breonna Taylor's story really just hit me in a different way."
"We've had dozens of Black women who have been murdered at the hands of the police across the country and not one single woman has received the justice," Sarsour said. "For us, we believe that Breonna Taylor and the case of Breonna Taylor and Louisville is the ground zero for the conversation on police brutality."
Is Until Freedom staying in Louisville? Yes. The organization started in New York, but in an Instagram post on Aug. 4 said it was relocating to Louisville.
"Our entire team is MOVING to live in Louisville for the foreseeable future," the group wrote in the post. "We are not playing games. We don't just talk. We organize. We are ready to sacrifice time with our families, our careers to stand by what we believe in."
The group has maintained a presence in Louisville for months and was vocal during rallies about its desire for that to remain.
During the July rally outside Cameron's home, Sarsour addressed a few neighbors who peered out their windows and stood on their lawns: "We want you all to know that you may see us often in your neighborhood."
"We are here to hold Daniel Cameron accountable and make sure that he does his job, because he is not doing his job."
And during an interview with The Courier Journal in July, Sarsour said: "We're not going to stop until Breonna Taylor gets justice because if Breonna Taylor doesn't get justice, the message across the country is that when a Black woman gets murdered, she is not going to get justice, and that is not all right with us."
Reporter Bailey Loosemore contributed to this story. Ben Tobin: bjtobin@gannett.com; 502-377-5675; Twitter: @TobinBen. Matt Mencarini: 502-582-4221; mmencarini@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @MattMencarini.
Above: Protesters seeking justice for Breonna Taylor march on July 14 from Ballard High School to the Graymoor-Devondale home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron. The action was organized by Until Freedom.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Left: Nicole Hayden, a community connector for Until Freedom, speaks with members of the media during the BreonnaCon event on Saturday at Vibes. "Today was basically about women empowerment," Hayden said.
$$$
