'A more full truth'
Tessa Duvall,
30 Sep 2020
"The public deserves to know everything."
That's the case Louisville attorney Kevin Glogower made Tuesday for an anonymous grand juror who is asking a judge to release secret recordings in the Breonna Taylor decision and let jurors speak freely about what happened.
Those grand jury recordings are expected to be released by noon Wednesday, after Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron said he would comply with a judge's order to make them public.
The release could shed new light on the decision not to charge the Louisville officers who fatally shot Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman, in her apartment in March during an attempted search for drugs and cash that went awry.
In a press conference last week, Cameron said the grand jury agreed Louisville officers Jonathan Mattingly and Myles Cosgrove were justified in shooting Taylor because her boyfriend fired at them first, thinking they were intruders.
But Glogower said Cameron's comments "don't fit together" between what the 12 grand jurors decided — and what Cameron's office decided for them.
The only charges the grand jury handed down were against a third officer, Brett Hankison, who faces three counts of felony wanton endangerment for shooting into an occupied apartment next to Taylor's. He was fired in June.
Cameron's spokeswoman acknowledged Monday night the only recommendation prosecutors made to the grand jury was for wanton endangerment charges against Hankison.
"I think it leaves, wide open, what was presented, which has been directly asked and not been answered" about the grand jury proceedings, Glogower said Tuesday morning at a news conference, flanked by three fellow attorneys.
Cameron under fire in Taylor case Glogower's comments came just 18 hours after he, on behalf of the anonymous grand juror, filed a motion in Jefferson County Circuit Court requesting the release of the records and seeking permission for grand jurors to speak about the Taylor case.
"It's not really about changing the narrative," Glogower said. "It's about opening it up to a more full truth for everybody to see."
The first-term attorney general's handling of the Taylor case has come under scrutiny since March 23, when a grand jury handed down its decision. The lack of charges reinvigorated protests in Louisville and sparked new demonstrations in cities across the country.
Attorneys for Taylor's family have criticized Cameron, calling on him to disclose what charges he presented to grand jurors and to release the transcripts and recording of the 2 1/2-day presentation.
Lonita Baker, one of those attorneys, applauded the "brave" grand juror who stepped forward and said the "public deserves better than the word games Daniel Cameron is playing to avoid telling the full truth."
"The grand juror is limited to what they are able to say at this point," Baker said in a statement, "but reading between the lines, it is obvious that Daniel Cameron lied to Tamika Palmer, the citizens of Kentucky, and the world when he said the grand jury agreed that Officers Mattingly and Cosgrove were justified to kill Breonna.
"The truth is, he never gave the grand jury the opportunity to make that decision."
At his news conference last week following the grand jury decision, Cameron told reporters that homicide charges were "not applicable to the facts before us because our investigation showed, and the grand jury agreed, that Mattingly and Cosgrove are justified in the return of deadly fire, after having been fired upon by Kenneth Walker."
Walker, Taylor's boyfriend, was home with Taylor when police tried to serve the search warrant just before 1 a.m. March 13. He admitted firing a shot at officers, saying he never heard them announce themselves.
Mattingly, Cosgrove and Hankison fired more than 30 rounds in response, striking Taylor six times and killing her in the hallway of her South Louisville apartment.
In a statement late Monday night, Cameron said because Mattingly and Cosgrove acted in self-defense, "the only charge recommended was wanton endangerment."
"I'm not sure that fully tracked with the words from the first press conference," Glogower said.
Lawyer says Cameron sowed 'seeds of doubt' The grand juror's motion accuses Cameron of using the grand jurors "as a shield to deflect accountability and responsibility for those decisions" and says that has led to "more seeds of doubt in the process."
"The full story and absolute truth of how this matter was handled from beginning to end is now an issue of great public interest and has become a large part of the discussion of public trust throughout the country," Glogower wrote in the motion, filed five days after the indictment.
Glogower declined to say what his client told him about the proceedings last week, citing confidentiality, but he did say the grand juror approached him Friday for help. Truth and transparency are the driving factors in his client's actions, he said.
"You take very seriously your role as a grand juror. At least we hope you do," Glogower told ABC News Monday. "This individual most certainly is.
"But that role does not include necessarily taking the responsibility of another entity or official's actions."
Before Glogower's motion, Jefferson Circuit Judge Ann Bailey Smith ordered "the recording of the grand jury proceedings" be filed in the court by noon Wednesday as a part of Hankison's arraignment Monday. He pleaded not guilty and is free on $15,000 bond.
Cameron's decision to comply came with misgivings.
"The grand jury is meant to be a secretive body," Cameron said in the statement.
"It's apparent that the public interest in this case isn't going to allow that to happen. As the special prosecutor, our team has an ethical obligation not to release the recording from the grand jury proceedings, and we stand by our belief that such a release could compromise the ongoing federal investigation and could have unintended consequences such as poisoning the jury pool."
The public will see "our team presented a thorough and complete case to the grand jury," Cameron's statement said.
Release of recordings may still leave questions Even when that recording is released, Glogower said, it still may leave much unknown.
In Jefferson County, he said, the grand jury typically only records the prosecutor's opening statements and witness testimony. Then the recording stops, and the prosecutor makes a recommendation on charges.
Grand jurors are allowed to deliberate in private before returning their decision.
Glogower said he was specific in his motion in seeking the right of grand jurors to speak freely about their experiences, including those not recorded, without fear of repercussion so they could fill in those blanks not captured on tape.
Cameron's statement said his team has "no concerns with grand jurors sharing their thoughts on our presentation because we are confident in the case we presented."
"'No concerns' doesn't necessarily mean that when you hear something you don't like, you're not going to change your mind," Glogower said.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com.
"It's not really about changing the narrative. It's about opening it up to a more full truth for everybody to see."
Louisville attorney Kevin Glogower
What Daniel Cameron said then vs. now
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron last week said it was the grand jury that ultimately decided to indict only ex-LMPD Officer Brett Hankison. This week a spokeswoman said the only charge recommended by the attorney general's office was wanton endangerment. Here is what he said then vs. now:
Cameron to reporters, Sept. 22
"I will not get into the specifics again of the proceedings themselves are secret but what I will say is that our team walked them through every homicide offense, and also presented all the information that was available to the grand jury, and then the grand jury was ultimately the one that made the decision about indicting Detective Hankinson for wanton endangerment.
"While there are six possible homicide charges under Kentucky law, these charges are not applicable to the facts before us, because our investigation shows and the grand jury agreed that Mattingly and Cosgrave are justified in the return of deadly fire, after having been fired upon by Kenneth Walker. Let me state that again. According to Kentucky law, the use of force by Mattingly and Cosgrove was justified to protect themselves. This justification bars us from pursuing criminal charges in Miss Breonna Taylor's death."
Cameron spokeswoman Elizabeth Kuhn, Sept. 28 statement
"We have no concerns with grand jurors sharing their thoughts on our presentation because we are confident in the case we presented. When the public listens to the recording, they will see that over the course of 21/2 days, our team presented a thorough and complete case to the grand jury. Our prosecutors presented all of the evidence, even though the evidence supported that Sgt Mattingly and Detective Cosgrove were justified in their use of force after having been fired upon by Kenneth Walker. For that reason, the only charge recommended was wanton endangerment."
Attorney Kevin Glogower speaks during a news conference on Tuesday. Glogower represents one of the grand jurors in the Breonna Taylor case who wants to have the transcript of the proceedings released. The recordings are to be released Wednesday.
photos by Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Glogower speaks during
a news conference Tuesday. Glogower says Attorney General Daniel Cameron's comments "don't fit together" between what the 12 grand jurors decided — and what Cameron's office decided for them.
$$$
