LMPD announces 'duty to intervene' policy in response to George Floyd's death
Duvall, Tessa
19 June 2020
Louisville Metro Police officers will have a new duty to intervene when they see misconduct from their fellow officers, interim Chief Robert Schroeder announced Thursday afternoon.
"Recently, all of us in law enforcement were shocked when we saw a video of George Floyd being killed in Minneapolis, as other police officers stood by and did nothing," Schroeder said. "That's not who we are as police officers. None of us signed up for that. That is not how we behave."
Floyd died after Officer Derek Chauvin kneeled on his neck for almost nine minutes. Chauvin has been charged with murder and three officers who were at the scene were charged with aiding and abetting.
Schroeder said intervening is "simply the right thing to do."
"While intervention should always be the response of police officers, this policy simply outlines departmentally how we expect our officers to behave," he said.
Mayor Greg Fischer called it a "good move and a common sense move."
"To the public, I promise there will be more changes to come," he said.
According to a copy of the new standard operating procedure provided by LMPD, all officers should act to prevent other officers, "regardless of rank or assignment, from using unlawful or excessive force."
The intervention, it says, may be verbal or physical, and should be immediately reported to their supervisor. The procedure prohibits retaliation against officers who report unlawful or excessive force.
Thursday marked the start of the fourth week of protests against police killings of Black Americans, including Louisville's own 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, who was fatally shot by police in March as they executed a no-knock search warrant at her apartment. Kenneth Walker, Taylor's boyfriend, fired once at police, and Taylor was killed in the crossfire. Walker said he thought he was firing at intruders.
"We have seen some tense and chaotic moments," Fischer said. "And our police officers have training on how to handle these situations, including deescalation tactics to try and take a situation where conflict is emerging and work to ratchet down the tension in order to avoid the use of force. That's what we're talking about when we say deescalation is the goal. That's not the same thing as an order to stand down, as some have suggested."
Fischer's comments appeared to be a response to George Rodman, a 2017 retiree and father of a fallen officer, who gathered with more than 100 off-duty and retired police officers on Tuesday to express frustration with city and police officials for "inadequate" leadership amid the ongoing protests.
Rodman said Fischer has given police orders to "stand down" on several occasions during the protests, adding that downtown Louisville looks like a war zone as a result.
Fischer said deescalation tactics are a "key part" of crisis intervention for police across the nation.
"That's the approach that we want officers to apply whenever possible, to protect the public and themselves," Fischer said. "So sometimes that takes patience, sometimes that takes waiting for things to cool down. ... The right application of these principles is not always obvious, especially to people that are not present, but resolving conflict and keeping everyone safe, without the use of force, is always the goal."
Fischer also said that use-of-force guidelines are being evaluated throughout Metro Government. Last week, Metro Corrections updated its policies to include a ban on chokeholds, he said. LMPD had already banned chokeholds.
Additionally, more than 7,000 Louisvillians have completed a survey about the traits they are looking for in a new police chief, Fischer said.
$$$
