Tyler Gerth 'died to fight for the outcast'
Eadens, Savannah
04 July 2020
On what would have been his 28th birthday, Tyler Gerth was remembered Friday by the Rev. Shayne Duvall as a person who documented humanity's fight for the dignity and respect every human deserves.
And he died while capturing that humanity.
Family and friends trickled into the chapel of St. Raphael the Archangel Catholic Church on Friday to celebrate the life of the Louisville photographer.
Gerth was killed in a shooting one week ago at Jefferson Square Park, where he was documenting the Breonna Taylor protests.
"I pray that in everything Tyler did to fight for the outcast, for those at the margins of society, those facing injustice and inequality, that he did it not for himself, but for others," Duvall said. "And more importantly, for our Lord."
It was a socially distant funeral, where gatherers were seated at a 6-foot separation, but the love, adoration and respect for Gerth could be felt throughout the church like a tight embrace.
At the start of Mass, Gerth's older sisters, Tiffany Hensley and Brittany Loewen, introduced, to hushed laughter from those in attendance, "Arnold," a football with a drawn smiley face – a "man of few words" and "COVID quarantine friend" of their brother, which they found while sorting through his personal things this week in preparation for the funeral.
Gerth was in most ways a pretty average guy, Loewen said with a crack in her voice and tears in her eyes.
You probably wouldn't have noticed him as you waited next to him to check out at Kroger, or looked twice if you pulled up next to him in his old blue truck at a stoplight, she said.
"He probably didn't cross your mind a whole lot as he played on your son's hockey team or took your daughter to the Trinity prom," she said. "And I'm sure you never thought twice about the guy dressed up in that hot, furry Easter Bunny costume at your neighborhood Easter egg hunt, who was doing it for the sole intent of making his nieces and nephews and other kids smile."
What was special about Gerth, she said, was the perseverance he showed no matter what life threw at him — the ability to reflect on himself, to grow, to change, to mature, to do better.
Gerth had become a vocal supporter of the ongoing protests against racism and police brutality and, his family said, a strong supporter of the Black Lives Matter movement.
"Tyler chose to see the God-given beauty, dignity and glory in every human being," Loewen said. "To have empathy, compassion and courage to lean into excellence is in no way ordinary. Our world has never needed us to exhibit that more than right now."
Nearly 28 years ago, Gerth was baptized at St. Raphael.
It was there, Duvall said, that God instilled in his "little heart" a spirit of integrity, passion and service.
In the homily, Duvall recited the Catholic teachings of justice and the "harmony that promotes equity."
And just as the blessed Mother Mary likely tried many times to convince her son to stay home, away from danger and the unknowns, so did Chuck and Gena Gerth watch their own son fight for equality, while promoting peace and love, Duvall said.
"Unfortunately, I do not have the power or the authority to officially declare Tyler a martyr or a canonized saint of the church. ... That's up to Pope Francis," Duvall said. "But I think we can all agree that what Tyler believed in, what he fought for, the teaching and formation he received at St. Raphael and at Trinity High School and beyond, prepared him to be a witness to the world, and a man of deep faith."
Holy water was sprinkled onto the urn inside an ornate box at the center of the oratory, where it shone under the light gleaming through stained glass windows. As communion was received, the waft of burning incense filled the air, palpable even through the face masks worn to protect from the ongoing threat of the coronavirus.
Gerth's family planned Friday night to watch the musical "Hamilton," newly released on Disney Plus, just as they had planned for his birthday.
"And even though there is a million things you haven't done, just wait, the world will know your name," Loewen said to her brother during the eulogy.
Turning to those in attendance, she added: "As you go today, allow this moment to sit with you. May it drive you to action in remembrance of the man who could've never dreamed of the plans the Lord had in store for him and the way that he would inspire and influence so many."
As everyone quietly exited the funeral, the cantor sang out: "I have heard you calling in the night. I will go Lord, if you lead me, I will hold your people in my heart."
Tyler Gerth's godfather is Joe Gerth, a Courier Journal columnist. Tyler Gerth also was a godfather to the columnist's daughter.
Steven Lopez, 23, is facing charges of murder and first-degree wanton endangerment in Gerth's death, Louisville Metro Police officials said Sunday after releasing his arrest citation.
Lopez appeared in court Tuesday, where he pleaded not guilty to the charges. His grandparents previously told The Courier Journal that he had a traumatic childhood, was diagnosed with mental illness and had been spiraling out of control after he stopped taking his medicine.
Savannah Eadens is a culture and diversity reporter for the Courier Journal. Reach Savannah at seadens@courierjournal.com or 502-381-9498.
The Rev. Shayne Duvall prays over the remains of Tyler Gerth on Friday at St. Raphael the Archangel Catholic Church.
Gerth was laid to rest Friday following a funeral service.
$$$
