Back the Blue rally met with counterprotesters
Tobin, Ben; Aulbach, Lucas
20 July 2020
"We all know that changes need to happen; we do. But defunding the police (budget) is not the way to go.
Lisa Watts
Tensions flared Sunday afternoon as counterprotesters at a support the police rally exchanged ideas — and words — with those had come out to back officers.
Hundreds of police supporters came out in the searing heat for the event at the Louisville Fraternal Order of Police lodge. It featured a performance by local musical group Linkin' Bridge and passionate speeches by George Rodman (the father of fallen Louisville Metro Police officer Nick Rodman); the officer and men who were the subject of a viral photo from the early days of Louisville's Breonna Taylor protests; and other speakers who said LMPD has been painted in an unfair light in recent weeks.
Toward the rally's end as supporters were leaving, a dozen or so counter-protesters showed up at the lodge on Price Lane Road. That group was held back from crossing the street onto FOP property and were met by an estimated 40 police supporters.
The two sides yelled at each other from across the street but never came to blows.
Lisa Watts, a small business owner, said she came to Sunday's event — organized by Louisville Metro Police Foundation, River City FOP and Supporting Heroes — because she's "tired of all the negativity surrounding our police officers and the amount of victimization that is going on."
"We all know that changes need to happen; we do," she said. "But defunding the police (budget) is not the way to go, and to group or categorize a group of individuals based on the actions of very few is ridiculous."
Watts, who has family and friends who are police officers, said she hopes both sides can exchange ideas about how to find common ground and ease tensions.
"When you talk in a logical tone and in a good tone, you open up the dialogue. When the dialogue is open, that's when the change will occur."
LaToya Wray, a 39-year-old from Louisville, came to protest at the FOP lodge because "black lives matter," she said.
"The Louisville police department is terrible and is a disgrace to this country," she said. "I think we need to abolish the police."
Watts said she believes the officers involved in Taylor's death should be "afforded due process."
Watts heard Rodman's speech, where he called for "unity, peace, healing and dialogue, which we all dearly need." The former LMPD officer called for peace in the city. At one point, he quoted the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in hopes of defusing the tension between police supporters and protesters.
Ninety-nine percent of officers are good individuals, he said. But that's not good enough, he acknowledged, saying that number needs to rise to 100 percent.
Ryan Nichols, president of River City FOP Lodge 614, called for leaders find common ground and find solutions. The police and the community, he said, are not two separate entities.
"Our community is in crisis right now, and we need strong compassionate and courageous leadership to help get us through these difficult times," he said.
Officer Galen Hinshaw and three men who formed a barrier in front of him to protect him after he was separated from other officers on the first night of the protest took the stage to express his gratitude.
"I say it loud and proud, these guys, without a doubt, saved me that night, and saved me from getting hurt," Hinshaw said. "I'm beyond thankful."
This rally follows another tense week between Louisville Metro Police officers and protesters demanding justice for Taylor.
On Tuesday, a group of protesters, led by national social justice organization Until Freedom, marched to Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's home in Louisville to insist he criminally charge the officers involved in the fatal shooting immediately.
Officers arrested 87 protesters, including NFL player Kenny Stills, Minneapolis NAACP President Leslie Redmond and all four co-founders of Until Freedom. Among other charges, the protesters were originally charged with intimidating a participant in the legal process, a Class D felony that is punishable by one to five years in prison.
However, Jefferson County Attorney Mike O'Connell said Friday he is dismissing felony charges.
"While we do believe the LMPD had probable cause for the charge, in the interest of justice and the promotion of the free exchange of ideas, we will dismiss that charge for each protester arrested this past Tuesday," O'Connell said in a statement.
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675.
"We all know that changes need to happen; we do. But defunding the police (budget) is not the way to go.
Lisa Watts
$$$
