Leaders: Virus, not protests, to blame for economic woes
Tobin, Ben
16 Aug 2020
With some downtown Louisville businesses expressing anxiety over property damage and safety amid ongoing racial justice protests, business leaders and current and future Louisville Metro Council members came together Wednesday for a discussion on the intersection of the two.
The discussion, hosted via Zoom by the Louisville Forum, a nonpartisan public issues group founded in 1984, revolved around the question: Can the push for racial justice and a vibrant downtown co-exist?
Participants included Louisville Metro Councilwoman Barbara Sexton-Smith, D-4th District; Metro Councilman-elect Jecorey Arthur, D-4th; Sarah Davasher-Wisdom, president and CEO of Greater Louisville Inc.; and Karen Williams, head of the Louisville Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Arthur, a community activist, musician and educator, said that the central question discussed by the panel is "based on the assumption that downtown was never meant to be racially just."
"The truth of the matter is that downtown is not designed for us, but it was built by us," Arthur said. "Slaves were dispatched in advance of their owners to clear land plant crops and build houses. And by the 1840s, there were slave trade businesses all around the city."
Davasher-Wisdom, the head of the Louisville area chamber of commerce, said it is "imperative" for the push for racial justice and a vibrant downtown to co-exist. She said that GLI has embraced diversity and pointed to the chamber's recently created Business Council to End Racism.
Though Davasher-Wisdom said she supports protesters' rights to peacefully assemble, "we also have to recognize that there's an increase in violence downtown," pointing to dozens of reported assaults in July and several thefts and robberies in the ZIP code that encompasses the area.
"We're also on track to have the most violent year ever throughout the community," she said. "This was all on track for this even before the protests began. So as we await the results of the state and federal investigations into the death of Breonna Taylor, anxiety builds in anticipation of potential vandalism that may have heard throughout the community."
Protesters have taken to the streets for more than 75 days to demand justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who was unarmed when shot and killed by police inside her home in March.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, who will make the decision on whether to charge the officers involved in the shooting, told The Courier Journal last week that his office is waiting for information on ballistics tests the FBI has been conducting. He did not provide an estimate when his team will complete its investigation and release results.
Davasher-Wisdom penned a letter to Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer in July to ask that he provide "clear accountability and leadership" when it comes to public safety. Earlier this week, she told The Courier Journal she views the police department's recent change to ban protesters from marching in the street as "an important step in the right direction."
Williams, the head of the Louisville Convention and Visitors Bureau, previously told The Courier Journal that the Louisville Tourism Visitor Center itself suffered $60,000 worth of damage and looting during May protests over the police killings of Taylor and George Floyd.
On Wednesday, though, Williams said it is the coronavirus pandemic — not recent protests — that is the true force of economic devastation for Louisville businesses. The city of Louisville has lost $350 million of economic impact since the pandemic took hold in mid-March, according to Williams.
"We cannot (and) should not blame the lack of business downtown on protests," Williams said. "... COVID is the reason where we are today."
Sexton-Smith, whose constituency includes the Central Business District, said there are several businesses she has heard from that "feel very threatened" and are blaming protests for current hardships.
"That's one approach," Sexton-Smith said. "But for everyone that I hear like that, I hear and I see a lot of other businesses that are open and operating."
Arthur, who will replace Sexton-Smith on the Metro Council after she decided not to run for reelection, said there's a false narrative that protesters are "wild animals."
"I'm here as one of the protesters to say that's not the case," Arthur said. "These protesters are mothers, students (and) citizens of a city that we all love.
"But the issue is — the city hasn't always loved us back."
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
A man looks at the boarded windows along a building in the Bourbon District on July 31. Much of downtown remains boarded up.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Windows are boarded in several Louisville buildings.
$$$
