Taylor's neighbor suing police for firing 'blindly'
Costello, Darcy
06 June 2020
Photos from attorney Sam Aguiar of Breonna Taylor's apartment show widespread damage: bullet holes in a clock, a blue cooking pot, a wooden chair and a full-length mirror. They hit walls, the ceiling and window curtains. Aguiar's photos also included a neighboring apartment, where he said a 5-year-old and a pregnant mother were home. There, a shattered patio door and multiple bullet holes can be seen.
Breonna Taylor's neighbor is suing the Louisville Metro Police officers who raided Taylor's apartment March 13 and killed her, claiming that their shots were "blindly fired" throughout the neighboring apartment and nearly struck a man inside.
The lawsuit, filed in May, says officers who were at Taylor's apartment to execute a search warrant went on to "spray gunfire into Chelsey Napper's apartment with a total disregard for the value of human life."
"A bullet that was shot from the defendant police officers' gun flew inches past Cody Etherton's head while he was in the hallway of Chelsey Napper's apartment," it states.
Napper was pregnant and had a child in the home.
The suit claims that gunshots struck objects in Napper's living room, dining room, kitchen and hallway. Her sliding glass door also was shattered, as seen in photos provided by Taylor's family's attorney, Sam Aguiar.
It also accuses the officers of failing to use "sound reasonable judgment" when firing "blind shots into multiple homes."
Napper, along with her child and the man at the residence, are seeking damages and a trial by jury against the three officers: Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove.
A request for comment left with Napper's attorney was not immediately returned.
No attorneys were listed for Mattingly, Hankison and Cosgrove. It's not clear if they've acquired legal representation.
Claims in a lawsuit are not evidence and represent only one side of the allegations.
The three officers also are the subject of a lawsuit from Taylor's family, as well as investigations being conducted by Louisville Metro Police's Public Integrity Unit and the FBI.
Napper's lawsuit additionally states that police unlawfully attempted to take into custody Etherton, the man in Napper's apartment that night. That claim is not elaborated on in the lawsuit.
Taylor's death and the night's events have launched protests in Louisville from hundreds of people demanding that the officers involved in her killing be fired and charged.
Officers arrived at Taylor's apartment before 1 a.m. March 13 with a no-knock warrant in connection with a narcotics investigation. Taylor was not the main subject of that case, but her name and address were on the warrant.
Police have said they knocked and announced their presence before breaking down the door with a battering ram. But Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who was there, has maintained that he thought intruders were breaking in.
He fired a shot and struck Mattingly in the femoral artery. Officers fired more than 20 rounds in return.
Photos from Aguiar of Taylor's apartment show widespread damage: bullet holes in a clock, a blue cooking pot, a wooden chair and a full-length mirror. They hit walls, the ceiling and window curtains.
Aguiar's photos also included a neighboring apartment, where he said a 5-year-old and a pregnant mother were home. There, a shattered patio door and multiple bullet holes can be seen.
Nearby residents placed 911 calls as gunfire erupted in Taylor's apartment, some unaware that police were already on the scene.
One woman asked police to come because "they are shooting bad."
Another woman described jumping out of bed because the shots scared her.
"Y'all need to get over here; they're shooting the hell like crazy."
In another call, a neighbor tells the dispatcher her apartment could be confused with another and describing bullet holes.
"My son is in here sleeping, and I need somebody to let them know, like, that we need help in here," the caller said. "I don't understand what's going on."
Photos from attorney Sam Aguiar of Breonna Taylor's apartment show widespread damage: bullet holes in a clock, a blue cooking pot, a wooden chair and a full-length mirror. They hit walls, the ceiling and window curtains. Aguiar's photos also included a neighboring apartment, where he said a 5-year-old and a pregnant mother were home. There, a shattered patio door and multiple bullet holes can be seen.
A bullet hole is still visible outside an apartment complex in Louisville on May 25, more than two months after Breonna Taylor was killed by police officers in her apartment as she and her boyfriend slept.
The shots fired by the Louisville Metro Police Department officers also struck Taylor's neighbor's apartment, according to a lawsuit filed last month.
$$$
