TIMELINE: 30 days of protests that rocked Louisville
Duvall, Tessa; Costello, Darcy
28 June 2020
In one of the longest sustained protests in Louisville's 242-year history, marchers have taken to the streets and downtown public places to rally for justice in the shootings by authorities of Breonna Taylor on March 13 and David McAtee on June 1. Here is how the last month went down:
Afternoon, May 28, 2020: Kenneth Walker's frantic call to 911 minutes after police fatally shot Breonna Taylor in her apartment are published by The Courier Journal, which received the recording from Sam Aguiar, an attorney for Taylor's family. More than an hour later, the city releases Walker's call, as well as more than a dozen calls from neighbors and police, made the night of the shooting.
Evening, May 28: Protests begin in Louisville, with calls for the officers in Taylor's shooting to be fired and criminally charged. They begin peacefully, but tensions rise, with police in riot gear clashing with protesters, using tear gas and pepper balls. At least seven people are shot by an unknown assailant.
May 29: Mayor Greg Fischer announces he is suspending no-knock search warrants like the one used to enter Taylor's apartment, telling protesters, "I hear you." Fischer also says a civilian review board to examine police shootings should have subpoena powers. A second night of protests ensues, with some violence and looting.
May 30: Taylor's younger sister, Juniyah Palmer, takes to social media to plead for peace: "Once y'all started vandalism, you took my sister's name out of place!" Later that morning, Fischer announces he is implementing a dusk-til-dawn curfew, and Gov. Andy Beshear sends in the National Guard.
June 1: On the city's fourth night of protests, LMPD and National Guard members to 26th and Broadway to break up a crowd after curfew. David McAtee, 53, the owner of a popular barbecue stand, dies in the ensuing encounter, fatally shot by the National Guard. Before the day's end, Fischer fires embattled police Chief Steve Conrad.
June 2: Fischer addresses protesters in person, speaking about police brutality and racial inequality in Louisville. He tells the crowd why he can't immediately fire the officers in Taylor's death and is met with chants of "No justice, no peace."
June 3: Fischer orders a 'top-to-bottom' review of Louisville Metro Police and announces that a Washington, D.C.,-based nonprofit will help in the national search for a new police chief.
June 5: A crowd of at least 1,000 gather on what would have been Taylor's 27th birthday to celebrate her. The massive demonstrations envelop Metro Hall downtown and culminate with protest marchers around the city.
June 8: The statue of John B. Castleman, a Confederate major turned Abraham Lincoln supporter, is removed from Cherokee Triangle after 107 years.
June 9: Officer Brett Hankison, one of the officers who fired weapons in Taylor's apartment, is accused of sexual assault by multiple women, The Courier Journal reports. The police department confirms it is looking into the allegations.
June 10: Interim Police Chief Robert Schroeder announces that police officers won't be allowed to use tear gas without his or his designee's approval. The city also launches a community survey for what residents want in a new police chief. Joshua Jaynes, the detective that sought the no-knock search warrant for Taylor's home, is placed on administrative reassignment.
June 11: U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, a Kentucky Republican, announces he will propose a national ban on no-knock search warrants. The measure will be named in honor of Taylor.
June 12: Fischer signs Breonna's Law, banning no-knock search warrants in Louisville. Metro Council unanimously passed the ordinance the night before.
June 13: Workers remove the marble statue of Confederate president and Kentucky native Jefferson Davis from the state Capitol, where it had stood for 84 years. On that same day,McAtee is buried, but people at his funeral vow to "make sure that his death was not in vain."
June 17: A protester is hit by a car in downtown Louisville, and two other protesters are charged with first-degree rioting and obstructing a highway.
June 18: Attorney General Daniel Cameron declines to tell news media when he will conclude his investigation into Taylor's death and instead asks the public for patience.
June 19: Fischer makes Juneteenth an official city holiday, with paid time off for municipal workers.
June 23: Hankison is officially fired as an LMPD officer.
June 25: Hundreds of people rally on the steps of the Kentucky Capitol in Frankfort, demanding justice for Taylor and other Black women. Celebrities, including Jada Pinkett Smith and the hip hop artist Common, show their support.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Push to defund police sparks mixed reactions in Louisville: June 15 cover of The Courier Journal
'Freedom isn't free': June 20 cover of The Courier Journal
DAVID MCATEE SHOOTING, MINUTE BY MINUTE: June 21 cover of The Courier Journal
A VOW TO STAND UP: June 26 cover of The Courier Journal
$$$
