LMPD: No evidence of hate crime in shootings
Aulbach, Lucas
22 Sep 2020
Louisville Metro Police Department Lt. Donny Burbrink has "heard the same thing everybody else has heard" about the suspect in the triple homicide Friday night at Bungalow Joe's Bar and Grill, but he's not ready to put a label on the case.
"We're exploring all options at this point, and I don't think that we want to pigeonhole ourselves and say that this is a hate crime or that this is racially motivated," the leader of LMPD's Homicide Unit said Monday afternoon.
"We don't have any evidence to say that at this point, and I don't want to fuel that fire by saying something that we do not have definitive proof that actually happened."
Michael E. Rhynes Jr., 33, has been charged with three counts of murder after police say he shot and killed three men — Steven Matthew Head, 24; Toreon Jermaine Hudson, 26; and William Scott Smallwood, 48 — who had gathered on the patio at the Highview bar around 11:30 p.m.
The suspect was arraigned Monday morning and given a $2 million bond after being arrested near the establishment Friday night.
Rhynes, who has no violent criminal history prior to Friday's shootings, was wearing a shirt that said "#Freedom," Burbrink said Monday, and included an image of the faces of Muhammad Ali and Colin Kaepernick. The detective said Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman shot and killed by LMPD officers this year in a case that has sparked more than 100 days of protests in the city, was not referenced on the shirt.
Rhynes is Black, as was Hudson, while Head and Smallwood were white.
Police have not yet established a motive for the shooting, Burbrink said.
Rhynes may have been asked to leave one or more other bars in Louisville before Friday's homicides, the LMPD lieutenant said, but he is not believed to have had any contact with the three victims before he is alleged to have opened fire.
"We've gone through everything that we can go through, but it looks like this is a completely random act," Burbrink said. "It doesn't seem like there was any type of altercation prior to (the shooting). It seems like our victims were shot without any type of provocation."
Bungalow Joe's closed for the weekend following the shooting, and a GoFundMe page was set up by the bar's owner to support the families of the three victims. It had raised more than $43,000 as of Monday afternoon.
The shooting at Bungalow Joe's wasn't the only homicide that occurred over the weekend. Hours later in a separate incident, Marvin McAtee was shot and killed by an unknown individual on the sidewalk in front of Dino's Food Mart at 26th and Broadway.
McAtee is the nephew of David McAtee, who was shot and killed on the same corner in June by Kentucky National Guard members who had been called to the scene amid the first nights of the Louisville protests.
The person of interest who police believe may have been behind that shooting is at large, Burbrink said Monday.
The department shared grainy stills from a video that showed a man in a white shirt, black jacket and gray hat in what appears to be a gas station parking lot and urged anyone with leads or information about the shooting to come forward and work with police.
Louisville broke its all-time yearly homicide record over the weekend, with more than three months left in 2020. Through Sept. 19, LMPD has responded to 121 homicides this year, and "about 34%" of cases are closed, Burbrink said, though he added eight deaths appear to be justified, and the department is awaiting rulings from the office of the commonwealth's attorney.
"This isn't an LMPD problem. This is a community problem," Burbrink said, minutes before he ended the press conference without taking several additional questions from invited media members. "And until we can develop something across the board to work with other entities outside the police department, I don't know how we take care of this problem."
$$$
