Churchill Downs lost $149M by delaying 2020 Derby
Schneider, Grace
31 July 2020
Churchill Downs blamed the loss of about $149 million in net revenue on rescheduling the Kentucky Derby and Kentucky Oaks from May to September because of the pandemic.
And while they're not writing off Derby 146 on Sept. 5, executives said there's little chance of recouping losses from its flagship event — in fact, the damage will roll into next year.
Fans and sponsors are being notified that besides getting refunds, they can defer their tickets and sponsorships until the next Derby in spring 2021, Churchill Downs Inc. chief executive Bill Carstanjen said during a Thursday conference call with investors.
"The Derby long term has not been damaged in any way, (but) we are going to do what's right by our customers and our sponsors," he said.
Churchill received permission from Gov. Andy Beshear to allow fans in the stands and luxury boxes during the rescheduled racing days in September, as long as the company carefully enforced mask requirements, social distancing and other safety measures.
The approval surprised many, including fans in Louisville and around the country who already decided the experience won't be worth the expense and have asked for refunds.
Since the decision, several states, including Kentucky, have rolled back business re-openings amid a troubling resurgence in coronavirus cases and boosts in positivity rates. Beshear this week ordered bars and taverns closed again into mid-August.
Beshear said later Thursday that if cases continue to escalate, it's "a threat" to the Derby and a big concern to him about whether he'd go to the race track, as governors traditionally do, to award the Kentucky Derby trophy.
"I hope Churchill is looking everyday at rethinking and rethinking on how they can make it safer ... we've got some good examples out there ... Derby's got to be a good example,"he said.
Carstanjen provided no estimate of how many fans are expected to venture to the track for what inevitably will be a far less exuberant celebration. But he said the crowd they're expecting will be "well under the capacity" limits established under the COVID-19 plan OK'd by Beshear's administration.
And the company isn't inclined to push it either. It's sold an undisclosed number of general admission tickets, typically the least expensive. But they cut off "GA" sales for the infield anyway and haven't decided if and when they might restart them while getting a handle on what's needed to make patrons feel safe, Carstanjen said.
Even with of all modifications for the event, they expect to keep shifting as needed before the week's races, he said.
In light of the unrest surrounding the deaths of Breonna Taylor and George Floyd, Carstanjen said, the company has committed to make the upcoming Derby an "inspiration" for the community and the country during the unprecedented confluence of the COVID-19 pandemic and protests over racial inequality and police brutality.
The gaming giant reported late Wednesday that its net revenue declined $162.9 million overall when compared with last year's second quarter at Churchill Downs racetrack, which included a $13.5 million hit from suspending operations at Derby City Gaming, its historical racing machine center located on Poplar Level Road in Louisville.
The pandemic already was taking a toll, dropping the company share price from this year's high of $164 in February to $129 a share at market close Wednesday. After the earnings call, the stock price gained ground, passing $139 for the day.
Churchill reported net revenue of $185.1 million for the second quarter, a decline of 61% over the same period last year, as well as a net loss of $118 million in the quarter. It also disclosed paying $124 million, or $95 million after taxes, as a one-time expense to settle two class-action lawsuits involving its former subsidiary Big Fish Games.
The annual Derby is the company's biggest single money maker, with on-track betting, global online wagering, ticket sales and sponsorships from companies like Brown-Forman and Ford Motor Co., which grabbed the truck sponsorship after Chrysler had it for years. Ford intends to showcase its Louisville-made Super Duty pickups and its new Escape models.
In a normal year, Derby and race days leading up to it drives an estimated one-fifth of the corporation's annual revenue or about $180 million. That's a big payout in light of operations that include other race tracks, online gaming and wagering, sports betting, plus casinos in eight states.
Still, the COVID-19 crisis led the company to delay a $300 million investment at the Louisville property involving a 156-room hotel, historical racing machine facility and a Millionaires Row expansion to add 1,000 pricey seats.
Churchill chief financial officer Marcia Dall said Thursday that until the company can get more clarity into the pandemic's impact, it still intends to delay the Louisville investments into 2021, two derbies down the stretch.
The pandemic also forced Churchill to delay construction on two large projects in Kentucky. Its planned second phase of a 1,325-historical racing machine venue at Oak Grove facility near Fort Campbell, estimated at $150 million, will now open in mid-October.
A $200 million total makeover of Turfway Park in Florence is now set to launch late next year, rather than next summer. That's about $45 million more than originally planned, executives noted, but the company's updated market analysis showed there's more than enough opportunity to justify the extra capital investment.
Grace Schneider: 502-582-4082; gschneider@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @gesinfk.
Churchill Downs president T. Kevin Flanery addressed the media in June about holding the Kentucky Derby with fans in the stands in September.
$$$
