Sanders, AOC back Booker in US Senate primary race
Kobin, Billy
10 June 2020
Sen. Bernie Sanders announced Tuesday morning he is endorsing Charles Booker in Kentucky's upcoming U.S. Senate primary that will determine which Democrat gets a shot at unseating Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
And minutes after Sanders threw his support behind Booker, U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York also said she is endorsing the Louisville Democrat.
The endorsements from Sanders, a Vermont senator and two-time presidential candidate, as well as Ocasio-Cortez, a progressive known as "AOC," adds to the momentum that Booker, has recently enjoyed.
Sanders mentioned that momentum in his endorsement announcement for Booker and five other candidates for Congress.
"As Louisville has become an epicenter of national tragedy and protests due to the police murders of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee, Charles has shown leadership by showing up on the frontlines," Sanders said. "He was an endorser of our campaign for president and supports progressive policies such as criminal justice reform, Medicare for All and getting big money out of politics."
Ocasio-Cortez tweeted that Booker is "building the kind of principled, inclusive, and winning coalition in Kentucky that can inspire positive change."
"The US Senate will be a better place with him in it," the New York Democrat said in her tweet that included a link to an ActBlue donation page. "I'm proud to endorse him. Let's go."
Tuesday morning was already an eventful one for Booker, the 35-year-old state representative from Louisville's West End.
His campaign on Tuesday released its first television ad a few hours before the endorsements rolled in from Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez.
The new, 30-second TV spot takes aim at Amy McGrath, one of Booker's rivals in the June 23 primary who has enjoyed greater name recognition and larger fundraising totals thanks, in part, to the backing of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
Booker has sought to differentiate himself from McGrath by running a more left-leaning and grassroots campaign.
Meanwhile, McGrath has said she opposes "Medicare for All" and free college tuition as part of a more moderate pitch to voters in a conservative state that went for President Donald Trump in 2016.
Booker took aim at McGrath and her "pro-Trump Democrat" stances in his new ad.
"I'm running for U.S. Senate because, in this crisis, Kentucky needs a real Democrat to take on Mitch McConnell," Booker says in the TV spot. "Someone who will fight to guarantee health care and living wages for all, and not help Trump just get his way."
Booker said Tuesday's endorsements from the two high-profile members of Congress are "further proof that our vision to end poverty, lead on structural change, and uplift all people is the right message at the right time."
"I am standing for Kentuckians. I am fighting for the Commonwealth I love, and the future I know we deserve. Kentucky is ready to lead, and the country is standing behind us," Booker said in a statement. "... We will win this primary, beat Mitch McConnell, and transform our future."
In response to Booker's latest set of endorsements, McConnell campaign manager Kevin Golden chose to keep the attention on McGrath.
"Amy McGrath has been running an inauthentic, extreme campaign for nearly a year, and she is still unattractive to Democratic voters," Golden told The Courier Journal. "It's not surprising that Democrats are already looking for a replacement."
For the first eight days of June, Booker's campaign said it raised nearly $700,000.
For the first three months of 2020, Booker raked in $315,432, according to the Federal Election Commission.
All of that money is still a fraction of the $12.8 million that McGrath, a retired Marine fighter pilot, raised during the first quarter.
Mike Broihier, another retired Marine and Democratic candidate from Lincoln County, raised $152,426 during the first quarter and has also positioned himself to the left of McGrath.
Despite the apparent fundraising gap, both Booker and Broihier have earned some notable endorsements ahead of the June 23 primary.
Broihier received an endorsement in May from Andrew Yang, the 2020 Democratic presidential candidate who, like Sanders, was not successful in his bid for the White House but garnered attention for his proposals, such as a universal basic income.
Apart from the Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez endorsements, Booker is also backed by 16 House Democrats in the Kentucky legislature.
On Sunday, Kentucky Sports Radio host Matt Jones said he was also endorsing Booker in a race that Jones himself once considered entering.
And on Tuesday afternoon, the editorial board of The Lexington Herald-Leader declared its support for Booker.
As Sanders alluded to in his endorsement message, Booker has spoken at numerous demonstrations around Louisville and Kentucky over the past two weeks related to the deaths of Taylor, McAtee and other black Americans at the hands of police.
$$$
