What Breonna Taylor demonstrators are telling reporters
Alund, Natalie Neysa
01 June 2020
I spent about nine hours walking nearly nine miles in downtown Louisville Saturday, where the city endured a third night of protests regarding the death of an unarmed black woman.
Breonna Taylor died in her apartment in March after being shot by Louisville Metro Police Department. No charges have been made in connection to her death.
Part of my assignment was to talk to as many people as possible as protesters marched and vandals and looters swept through the city.
I talked to dozens of people, about 50 people who attended — 80% of them being from the Louisville or Lexington area. The rest came from such regional cities as Cincinnati and Indianapolis.
Few offered their names; saying they did not want their identity known.
Here's what people told me:
Tiffany Kilgore, 32, of Louisville, who got hit with tear gas by police while peacefully protesting outside Metro Hall: "We was just standing there saying 'hands up don't shoot, please stop killing us.' Next thing you know tear gas is flying at us, they even blocked us in... we was blocked in."
A U.S military combat veteran and lifelong Louisville resident wearing a camo military vest and holding an AR-15 at Jefferson Square who, when questioned, said he was not a white supremacist, but wanted people to be able to protest peacefully: "If I have to make myself a target to keep people safe ... while they speak their minds, I will 100%."
An unidentified man watching police in plain clothes smash milk jugs and cases of water protesters had stockpiled on the corner of Jefferson and Sixth streets: "These are cops right here destroying everything. You're going to take the materials of us trying to peacefully protest. You are aggressing!"
Michael Snyder of Louisville, owner of Locked In escape rooms on Fourth Street, while holding an AR-15 standing outside his looted business with broken glass at his feet: "It's a shame what they did here and across the city. I'll guard it all night if I have to."
A man who only identified himself as Ian mixed water and backing soda together, used to treat people exposed to tear gas: "My goal is to provide bottles to families with children," he said while kneeling down in Jefferson Square.
A Louisville man named Bos Bon, while shouting at passing motorists honking horns, with passengers hanging out open doors and sun roofs in front of the vandalized McDonalds on West Broadway near Second Street: "We won't be silenced."
Amberlee Tate, of Louisville, while painting signs outside a car parked on South Third Street: "I wrote a (bail bondsman's) number on my arm, so I have someone to call if I get arrested."
Tiffany Kilgore, 32, of Louisville, and her friend were tear gassed near Metro Hall in Louisville by police officers while protesting the death of Breonna Taylor Saturday night. She said they are OK.
Photos by Natalie Neysa Alund
A U.S military combat veteran and lifelong Louisville resident wearing a military vest and holding an AR-15 at Jefferson Square, who declined to give his name, said he wanted people to be able to protest peacefully.
$$$
