At rally, driver hits protester and flees
Aulbach, Lucas; Kobin, Billy
18 June 2020
Officers fired off several rounds of pepper bullets at the group and arrested at least two people as others moved back to Jefferson Square Park, which has turned into a gathering area and memorial in honor of Taylor and other Black Americans killed at the hands of police.
Police say Wednesday morning's protest in downtown Louisville led to 17 arrests, five cars towed, one confiscated gun and a search for a driver who hit a protester with their car.
The protesters, including some who had been camping in tents at Jefferson Square Park as part of mostly peaceful protests in the aftermath of the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, blocked streets around the park about 7 a.m.
Louisville Metro Police spokesman Lamont Washington said LMPD Special Response Team officers arrived at the scene after protesters did not comply with requests to stop blocking traffic in the area around Jefferson Street and Fifth and Sixth streets.
Several protesters had also parked their cars in the street to act as additional obstacles.
That area, which includes nearby landmarks like the Metro Corrections jail building, City Hall, LMPD headquarters and the county courthouse, has been blocked by demonstrators several times over the past few weeks of protests.
Police at the scene handcuffed several people and fired pepper bullets toward protesters and the ground in front of them to break up the crowd that included 25 to 35 people at various points.
The streets were reopened by 8 a.m., according to LMPD.
Police provided video captured on Real Time Crime Center cameras, which are on the Metro Corrections building by the corner of Sixth and Liberty streets, that showed an individual in a car appearing to be confronted by about 10 protesters on Liberty.
The car drove forward, running directly into an individual and flipping the person over the hood on to the street.
After hitting the person, the car speeds off on Liberty Street and heads east on Sixth Street, the video shows.
As others tended to the person hit by the car, who eventually was seen standing up and walking, another person in the crowd ran up to the car and pulled out a gun as the vehicle slowed at the intersection of Fifth and Liberty streets.
The individual reached for the side door of the car before the vehicle drove off, the footage shows.
Washington said Louisville police are looking for the driver of that vehicle to investigate further. Washington's statement did not clarify whether the gun that police confiscated Wednesday morning was the one seen in the on-camera incident.
Protesters continued to have periodic confrontations with police officers until law enforcement personnel left Jefferson Square Park about 10:15 a.m. Wednesday.
One tense moment occurred shortly before 9 a.m. at Fifth and Jefferson streets, where a woman was seen yelling at officers as other demonstrators tried to calm her down.
Three officers eventually walked toward the woman and accompanying group and yelled "back up" to get them out of the middle of Fifth Street.
A fourth officer then walked over and fired several pepper bullets at the ground in front of the protesters to get them on the sidewalk.
After police moved everyone out of the street by Fifth and Jefferson streets, a group of about 15 people walked over to Liberty Street between Sixth and Seventh streets.
As the group stood in the middle of Liberty Street, police officers moved in from the west and told the crowd to disperse.
"Y'all are thugs!" one man yelled at the officers.
Others briefly chanted the name of David McAtee, the West End barbecue stand owner who was fatally shot June 1 by a Kentucky National Guard soldier while authorities attempted to disperse a crowd from a nearby parking lot.
Eventually, officers fired off several rounds of pepper bullets at the group and arrested at least two people as others moved back to Jefferson Square Park, which has turned into a gathering area and memorial in honor of Taylor and other Black Americans killed at the hands of police.
Several minutes later, police again advanced on more people who stood at the edge of Jefferson Square Park, taking several into custody.
Calmer moments then returned, with some protesters seen talking more peacefully with police at the corner of Sixth and Liberty streets.
Others continued to yell profanities at officers, who eventually left the area.
One LMPD officer told the protesters that if they returned to the street, then "we will return."
Washington said the charges for the 17 people arrested throughout the morning include inciting a riot, second-degree disorderly conduct, obstructing a highway, harassment with contact, second-degree fleeing and third-degree assault.
Five cars were towed from the area, Washington added.
"Again, we have repeatedly asked protesters not to block intersections, which is what prompted police action this morning," his statement said.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Officers fired off several rounds of pepper bullets at the group and arrested at least two people as others moved back to Jefferson Square Park, which has turned into a gathering area and memorial in honor of Taylor and other Black Americans killed at the hands of police.
Louisville Metro Police officers arrest protesters during a morning rally in downtown Louisville on Wednesday.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
A person was hit by a car near Liberty and Sixth streets in downtown Louisville. Another person pulled out a gun on the same car afterward.
Courtesy LMPD
Protesters yell at Louisville Metro Police officers during a morning rush-hour confrontation on Liberty Street downtown.
$$$
