Greene, UK's lone Black head coach, is educator
Hale, Jon
15 July 2020
LEXINGTON — Kentucky track and field head coach Lonnie Greene knew he needed to talk to his team about the racial inequalities that have sparked nationwide protests in recent weeks.
Following the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbrey, Greene was particularly concerned about how his Black athletes were coping emotionally and physically.
"Once I felt comfortable that they were in a good place or a good space, then I opened it up to the entire team," Greene said. "I'm not pitting one against the other, but at this point, the stress or the tension was pointed toward people of color. I had to make sure that demographic was taken care of and was in a safe space."
As Kentucky's only Black head coach, Greene has a unique perspective on the challenges facing his Black athletes.
A Courier Journal analysis of the head coaches at Power Five conference programs, revealed only 79 of the 1,073 head coaches (7.4%) are Black. Of the 65 Power Five conference schools (including Notre Dame, a football independent but member of the ACC in basketball), 59 have two or fewer Black head coaches.
Track and field and cross country lead the way among Power Five sports, with 25 Black head coaches, but Greene still sees work to do to increase representation in his sport.
There is some reason to hope the success of many of those 25 coaches could open doors for others.
"Have there been great strides? Have there been huge improvements in some of those numbers? Yes, yes," Greene, who came to UK from Purdue in 2018, said. "There's a lot of great African American coaches in track and field, and they're getting it done, bar none. We're getting it done, bar none. People can say what they want to say, but we're getting it done. When you go to the national championships, we are the ones that are in the conversation. Our programs are in the conversation."
UK women's indoor track and field team finished the coronavirus-shortened seasons ranked No. 6 nationally. The Nos. 4, 6, 7 and 8 teams in the last USTFCCA poll were led by Black coaches. Three of the top-five ranked men's indoor teams were led by Black coaches.
The second-place teams in men's and women's outdoor track in 2019 were led by Black coaches.
"I believe we do a very good job of preparing young people for championships, we do a very good job of casting vision," Greene said. "I think we do a very good job at administrating. I think we do an excellent job of encouraging, and I think we do a very good job of what I call championship preparation. I think a lot of times its downplayed as anybody can do that, but in reality everybody can't. If that was the case, everybody would be doing it."
Of the NCAA sports at the Power Five conference schools, track and field/cross country is the only sport with more than 12 Black head coaches.
The success of Black coaches like Greene, former Kentucky coach Edrick Floreal (now at Texas), Southern Cal coach Caryl Smith Gilbert, Florida coach Mike Holloway, Oregon coach Robert Johnson, Kansas coach Stanley Redwine and Stanford coach J.J. Clark has likely contributed to track and field having more Black head coaches than the other sports, Greene said.
But he feels there is an element of prejudice demonstrated by those numbers too.
"In the revenue sports I think it's hard for an athletic director to give the keys to the Porsche or the Lamborghini to a minority because of the constituents that support the program," Greene said. "Because track and field is just looked at as a sport where we just run and people sort of put down the level of knowledge that goes into preparing the program to run at the highest level, to prepare athletes to compete at the highest level."
While some in athletics may not view track as a "thinking man's sport," as Greene said, he points to the science and training that goes into coaching the best athletes as one area for increasing the number of Black head coaches.
"At the end of the day, in our sport, speed and power is what wins championships," Greene said. "... A lot of times there is an African American or minority ballistic coach that's an assistant that's actually getting it done."
For those assistant coaches to be hired as head coaches, athletic directors need to place more emphasis on the total resume instead of preexisting relationships, Greene said.
That's a similar theory posited by Richard Lapchick, the director of the Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport at the University of Central Florida, which publishes an annual Racial and Gender Report Card for each American professional sports league and the NCAA.
Since white school presidents tend to hire white athletic directors, who in turn hire white coaches, Lapchick advocates for college sports adopting its own version of the Rooney Rule, which would require schools to interview multiple qualified minority candidates for jobs.
For that policy to work, the representation of Black assistant coaches is key. According to the NCAA's demographics database, the percentage of Black head coaches and black assistant coaches was within a point in both men's and women's track and field in 2018-19, the most recent year data is available.
"A diverse staff when there's a white head coach is one Black coach," Greene said. "A diverse staff when there's an African American head coach is maybe 50-50. That's a hard fact, but it's a reality if you look at it."
Several of the Power Five conference schools surveyed by The Courier Journal noted their Black track and field coaches were in charge of as many as six different teams: men's indoor, women's indoor, men's outdoor, women's outdoor, men's cross country and women's cross country.
That is the case for Greene at Kentucky, but some schools split head coaching responsibilities for those teams.
Still, Black track and field head coaches being in charge of more athletes than coaches in other sports can have a positive effect in the current conversation about racial injustice and athletes speaking out in support of Black lives.
"For a lot of white coaches to talk about race is a very uncomfortable moment for them," Lapchick said.
That is not a problem for Greene or his Black coaching colleagues. It is a viewpoint his athletes, Black and white, stand to benefit from.
"I put a statement out there where I said I would stand toe to toe, side by side with those kids to protect them against any form of hate, bigotry or racism because at the end of the day, I'm an educator," Greene said. "At the end of the day, I'm a teacher, and in my mind ... being an educator has no racial or color barriers. It is about producing productive young men and women who can go into their communities and society and make a difference for the good. That's the way I see what I do."
Jon Hale: jahale@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @JonHale_CJ. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/jonh.
$$$
