Paschal: UK united against racism
Hale, Jon
10 June 2020
LEXINGTON – Josh Paschal never doubted Kentucky football teammate Landon Young was an ally.
But when Young, a white offensive tackle who stayed in shape during the coronavirus shutdown by rolling hay bales on his family farm, was among the UK football players to voice support during the team's Black Lives Matters march in downtown Lexington, Paschal, a black defensive lineman from near Washington, D.C., still took notice.
"It's not a surprise to me, just because I know what type of guy he is," Paschal said Tuesday on a Zoom news conference with local reporters. "He's a great human being and he loves everybody. I personally knew that he had my back. That was never a doubt in my mind, but just to hear it and for him to be more vocal about it, it means so much to know that he's willing to use his platform to help us."
In the wake of world-wide protests following the deaths of African Americans George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery, UK football players and coaches marched through downtown Lexington Friday wearing shirts reading Black Lives Matter. Coach Mark Stoops, director of player development Courtney Love, Paschal and Young all spoke out against racism in interviews at the event.
On Monday, UK football players began returning to campus for summer workouts amid the coronavirus pandemic.
There has not been much time in the locker room together due to social distancing guidelines for the workouts, but Paschal said conversations about race spark by the protests have continued among teammates.
"I feel like we're talking about them a lot more," he said. "...This is a time where I feel like the team is united. We're all fighting for the same cause, as we all were on Friday also. I know that every single one of my teammates, no matter the color of their skin, they all have our backs."
To Paschal, football represents the perfect case example for confronting rampant racism across the country.
In a locker room with both black and white players, Paschal said he never noticed racial tensions because of the common goal all his teammates were working toward.
That does not mean more work is not needed, even in the sports world.
"One thing I wish I almost did myself or had some pushing in college was to have these uncomfortable conversations in the locker room," former Kentucky basketball player Reid Travis said in a panel about race on John Calipari's "Coffee with Cal" Facebook Live show Monday.
Travis, a native of Minneapolis where Floyd was killed by police, said he recently had a conversation with a former Stanford teammate – Travis spent four years at Stanford before transferring to Kentucky for his final year of eligibility – about the cause of protests in his hometown after his teammate questioned the need for them.
"I really took the time to sit down and have this dialogue with him and give him the perspective of where I'm coming from, where are people in my community coming from," Travis said. "At the end of the day, I feel like he had a better understanding, but where I feel like I did a disservice was I was in the same locker room as this guy for four years and this was the first time we had that dialogue and this conversation. Maybe if we would have had that my freshman year, he goes back to his community and he's better educating them because he is a voice and he does have a name and a face."
Travis's comments came in response to Calipari asking the four African American panelists (former Cincinnati Bengals coach Marvin Lewis, Harvard basketball coach Tommy Amaker and Indianapolis Pacers star Victor Oladipo joined Travis in the discussion) what he could do better to be an ally for black athletes as a white coach.
At the football protest, Stoops, who acknowledged he has been generally reluctant to weigh in on non-football issues, promised to no longer remain silent about racial injustice.
Encouraging more dialogue about race within their teams, is an avenue both UK coaches can pursue moving forward.
Paschal expects further conversations between his black and white teammates about ways to continue to voice support for the cause after the team's march, including statements they might make when the 2020 season starts.
Just less than four years after NFL quarterback Collin Kaepernick drew widespread criticism for kneeling during the national anthem as a protest to oppression of African Americans, Paschal has hope voices like his are being listened to more now.
"I feel like things are starting to change now, just by everybody realizing there is a problem," Paschal said. "There's still people who are trying to fight it, act like it's not a problem, bringing up statistics and things like that, really choosing statistics over actual feelings, but I feel like this time a lot of people are owning up to it. It's a time where the whole country – you see clips around the whole world – is fighting for justice."
$$$
