30 DAYS OF PROTEST
Kenning, Chris; Ladd, Sarah
28 June 2020
"It seemed like a shift kind of came ... The focus kind of stopped being on, 'We need to just rally and protest' to 'We need to become community support for people.' The West End kind of started controlling its own comm-unity."
Stachelle Bussey
Louisville minister and activist who said the McAtee shooting had a two-fold effect on the protests
Streets packed with chanting protesters. Riot police shooting tear gas. Curfews. A fatal National Guard shooting.
The police chief fired. Long-debated Confederate-era statues carted away. A proposed $50 million Black community fund.
Talk of recalling a three-term mayor. New policing rules.
The past month has been both wrenching and extraordinary in Louisville, a Southern border city with a long history of struggles with racism, thrust anew onto the front lines of a national reckoning over policing, equality and racial injustice.
When ER tech Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman, was shot dead by police in a "no-knock" drug raid in early March, the public initially took little notice as stories of Kentucky's virtual shutdown from the COVID-19 pandemic dominated the media spotlight.
But by May 28, Taylor's name joined Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd as rallying cries that sent thousands into the streets in cities across America and around the world.
What followed in Louisville – another death at the hands of authorities, recriminations over vandalism, a public divided over police response, calls for the mayor to resign, promises of long-sought reforms and a growing awakening to racism – was a dizzying month like few before it in Louisville's long history.
How will historians look back on 30 days of some of the most sustained demonstrations in the city's history? A moment equal to the epic civil rights struggles of the 1960s? A spasm of activism that produced nominal reforms and sputters? Or will it be a lasting reckoning that will finally mark a turning point in persistent racism and inequality?
The Courier Journal spoke to protesters, civil rights leaders, historians, professors, ministers and others who are taking stock of the month's events and wondering how the city's "moral moment," as one Black lawmaker put it, may transform a city where the legacy of racism lingers decades after battles for open housing and school integration.
Louisville's protests may go down as profoundly significant not only for sparking police reforms, some argued, but because the Black Lives Matter message seems to have penetrated further than ever before into white America's consciousness.
It's playing out in family conversations, in churches, in Congress and corporate actions across the city and country.
"We've had inflection points in our civil rights history, and I think this last month ranks right up there," said Dewey Clayton, a University of Louisville professor who studies civil rights and African American politics.
"Somehow," he said, "the fog has been lifted."
'Enough was enough' It began on a warm night on May 28, as hundreds streamed into downtown Louisville, a city of just over 617,000, a few blocks from where the hometown great's Muhammad Ali Center overlooks the Ohio River.
Pent up after three months of coronavirus — which had a disproportionate impact on Black residents — anger had been slowly growing for weeks about Breonna Taylor, killed by Louisville Metro Police officers March 13 as they broke through the door of her apartment while executing a no-knock search warrant in a narcotics investigation.
While police claimed they announced themselves, Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, said he heard nothing and fired a warning shot, hitting an officer in the leg. Walker was charged with attempted murder, but those charges were later dropped at the request of Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine.
No drugs were found. The three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment weren't required to wear body cameras.
Frustration over the latest police killing of a Black resident reached the boiling point that day — after the May 28 release of an explosive 911 tape lasting less than three minutes in which Walker could be heard crying out Taylor's name as he called a dispatcher.
"I don't know what is happening," Walker, 27, said. "Somebody kicked in the door and shot my girlfriend."
Already, people were protesting in Minneapolis over a video showing police kneeling on George Floyd's neck for more than 8 excruciating minutes.
The 46-year-old Black man was accused of using a counterfeit $20 bill. He died after police ignored repeated pleas that he couldn't breathe.
For many in the crowd filling downtown Louisville — chanting Taylor's name and calling for the officers involved in her death to face charges and an end to no-knock warrants — protesters were met with police in riot gear.
Together, hundreds of people rallied to the cry of "Whose streets? Our streets!" and marched through downtown, forcing police cruisers to retreat as they went.
"It was organic. It was a spontaneous cry of enough was enough. This was intolerable," said state Sen. Gerald Neal, a longtime civil rights proponent who represents West Louisville.
Montez Jones, one of the first few people to gather downtown that first night, never thought of himself as an activist. But he took his nearly 5,000 Facebook friends and 11,000 followers to Sixth and Jefferson on live videos as the crowd grew from five to hundreds.
"That ain't my lane," he remembers thinking. "I'm just a regular entertainer. ..." But he decided, "I'm gonna do it," and headed downtown.
Crowds grew much quicker than he imagined, and he has been back every day since.
At Metro Hall that night, a police vehicle nearly overturned as protesters rocked it back and forth. Glass storefronts were shattered. Police fired pepper balls.
At one point, at least seven people were injured when shots rang out. The choking, chalky taste of tear gas pervaded the air for blocks.
The following day, Mayor Greg Fischer suspended the use of no-knock warrants and said he thought a civilian review board should have subpoena powers. But that didn't stop a second night of protests.
More property damage and looting were reported that night, actions that U.S. Attorney Russell Coleman, the top federal prosecutor for Western Kentucky, has since denounced as people "exploiting Louisville's challenges for their own gain."
So why now, some watching live feeds wondered, after so many other instances of police shootings, from the 2014 shooting in Ferguson, Missouri, to countless others like it?
While some said the pandemic lockdowns contributed — with more time to follow social media and news, and to attend — Tracy K'Meyer, a University of Louisville professor who studies social movements, said the cumulative effect of such cases may have reached a tipping point.
It wasn't just unequal policing. Underlying it all were the lingering effects of Louisville's former practices such as redlining, urban renewal and segregation. Compared with white residents, Black residents still face lower rates of homeownership, wealth and education, and higher rates of incarceration and illness, the latter borne out during the coronavirus pandemic.
Louisville had also recently grappled with unequal traffic stops in the predominantly Black West End and racial disparities in marijuana charges. Despite changes that were made by the city in response, for many, it was far from enough.
Clayton believes part of the answer was simply the painful-to-watch Floyd video. He linked it to an attitude-shifting moment in the 1960s, when a TV broadcast showed pictures of police beating civil rights protesters into American living rooms for the first time, shocking viewers who hadn't been paying close attention.
The protests drew many from the younger generation and had the ubiquity of social media and cellphone live-feeds.
"They were saying, 'If this is going to happen, it's up to us,'" said The Rev. Ann Deibert, a co-pastor at Central Presbyterian Church in Louisville, who attended some of the protests.
White protesters often lined up in front of their Black counterparts during demonstrations, which they viewed as a way to use their privilege during police confrontations.
While a dedicated set of white activists have always played a role in civil rights battles in Louisville, others noted that these protests were unusually interracial, K'Meyer said.
Louisville police response renews criticism After two nights of protests, third-term Mayor Greg Fischer announced a dusk-to-dawn curfew and that the state was dispatching 350 National Guard troops.
The tone and numbers of demonstrators, he said, had "turned from being a peaceful protest into violence and terrorism and looting on the streets of our city."
It didn't take long for the consequences to turn tragic and, to some, underscore the very issues protesters were raising.
On June 1, police and National Guard troops were sent to break up a crowd at 26th and Broadway in the West End, long the center of complaints of unequal policing.
It was after the 9 p.m. curfew, which hadn't been evenly enforced around the city. And the people congregating in the parking lot weren't protesting.
Soon, there was an exchange of gunfire that killed beloved West End figure David McAtee at his YaYa's barbecue shack.
State officials and police say video and forensic evidence indicate McAtee fired first and he was fatally wounded by a guard member's rifle bullet. Family said McAtee, who often fed police, would never intentionally shoot at officers.
The next day, it was discovered that neither of the two LMPD officers who fired their weapons at McAtee had activated their body cameras. Fischer fired Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad, who led the police department during a series of controversies, including a sex abuse scandal involving officers, and a skyrocketing homicide rate.
Some civil rights leaders said the McAtee shooting, which occurred while all the city was watching, served to underscore the issues behind the protest.
Why were police and Guard members breaking up a gathering in the West End when few officers were enforcing the curfew in the predominantly white East End?
"The decision to do the curfew and the police response ... I think it got people more upset and more willing to do something," K'Meyer said.
While police have said they have at times been the target of items like frozen water bottles or fireworks, the protests have been largely peaceful.
Stachelle Bussey, a Louisville minister and activist, said the McAtee shooting had a two-fold effect on the protests.
First, the Kroger near Dino's Food Mart at 26th and Broadway, one of the West End's only grocery stores, closed after suffering damage and looting. After that, people rallied together to meet the needs of the community.
"It seemed like a shift kind of came, especially in west Louisville," she said. "The focus kind of stopped being on, 'We need to just rally and protest' to 'We need to become community support for people.' The West End kind of started controlling its own community."
The second way the McAtee shooting was a turning point in the protests, Bussey said, was in people's shifted interest in policy.
People started asking questions, she said: Why was the National Guard there anyway? What policy led to Louisville being over-policed? What is the National Guard's role? Do they support LMPD?
And the police response downtown, including shooting pepper balls at a local TV reporter, made news viewers stop and think.
"We saw them being met by the militarization of police. Shields, helmets on, tear gas ... it was like overkill," Clayton said. "It highlighted what many in the African-American community knew and had seen" leaving some to think, 'Wait a minute. Maybe we need to rethink what the police role is.'"
Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, said the violence and destruction hurt her daughter's cause.
"I felt like it was disrespectful to her even, just to be out here tearing stuff up, saying her name. Don't put her name on that because that's not the type of person she was. She wouldn't be out there doing that," she said.
Remarkable to some was that the Black Lives Matter protests weren't confined to urban areas. In fact, they spread to largely white small towns across Kentucky in rural areas known for their conservative views.
"What struck me was you had the whole state involved. You could go into towns and hamlets — my God, Harlan, Kentucky, — to see people standing up with signs," Neal said.
Breonna Taylor protests spark changes As peaceful protests continued to show staying power through most of June, marching in residential neighborhoods and setting up in a park across from city hall, city officials announced an array of changes.
That included plans for independent "top-to-bottom" review of the more than 1,000-officer department, including training, bias-free policing and accountability.
There would be a national search for a new police chief, informed by a community survey.
Police would be banned from shooting tear gas at peaceful protesters without the chief's approval. And police adopted a "duty to intervene" requirement for when they see misconduct from their fellow officers.
Some said it was only a start. For longtime activists, the speed of the moves was a jarring, if welcome, change.
"Some of us have been calling for a civilian police review board with subpoena powers for years, and it hasn't gone anywhere. And we now have a work group" with the aim to create one, said Raoul Cunningham, president of the Louisville NAACP.
On June 11, the Metro Council unanimously approved a ban on no-knock warrants, dubbed as "Breonna's Law," with leaders saying their dangers outweighed supposed benefits.
Just over a week ago, Brett Hankison, one of three LMPD officers to fire at Breonna Taylor's apartment, was terminated for "blindly" firing 10 rounds into Taylor's apartment complex in what the interim police wrote as "shock to the conscience."
An attorney for Hankison said city officials fired him before investigations were complete, offering up his client as a "sacrifice" in an "effort to appease the gods of public opinion."
None of the other officers have been fired or charged, and the state attorney general, overseeing the shooting investigation, hasn't set a timeline.
All that led to a backlash from the city's Fraternal Order of Police, which has said on social media that the mayor should instead "review his corrupt administration" and was "allowing good people of all races and neighborhoods to be victimized by violent criminals."
One veteran Black Louisville police officer, who retired after 28 years on the force amid the protests, said real change will have to come in the attitudes of some of the officers.
"You need officers to step up and tell fellow officers that racist jokes will not be tolerated and are unacceptable. We need officers to step up and intervene when they see another officer verbally and physically abusing another citizen," Andre Bottoms said. "We need officers to tell their superiors when officers are conducting illegal traffic stops because they are 'fishing.'"
Some in Louisville say they've already noticed a difference in police interactions. Jones said he was recently pulled over and said officers were reminding each other to turn on body cameras.
But, he said, he doesn't think the culture of LMPD has changed — he just thinks they're afraid. As for Chief Schroeder: "He knows that the whole world (is) watching," Jones said.
When people aren't protesting on the streets, that's when his true colors will show, he said.
Louisville poet and activist Hannah Drake is also skeptical.
"You know the police have terrorized Black people in Louisville. That's reality," she said. "But that just didn't start, and it's going to take a long time to heal that. You don't just come back from that after a month, especially while you're trying to heal a community and you're tear-gassing them."
Wider impact and promise of change By June 19, Kentucky's governor and the mayor of its largest city had both declared Juneteenth, the celebration related to the end of slavery, a holiday.
It came more than a week after Louisville quietly removed a statue of John Castleman, the former Confederate major and champion of Louisville's parks system, after years of debate and legal maneuvering. It stood in the Cherokee Triangle neighborhood since 1913.
In a similar fashion, a statue of Kentucky-born Confederate president Jefferson Davis was removed from the state Capitol's main rotunda, where it stood for 84 years. Calls for its removal had been going on for decades but intensified amid the protests.
Meanwhile, companies such as Starbucks allowed workers to wear Black Lives Matter slogans. Netflix highlighted Black history documentaries.
Companies vowed to hire and promote more Black workers. Aunt Jemimah syrup and other products with racial stereotypes were scrapped.
NASCAR banned Confederate flags at their events. And Louisville-based YUM Brands — which owns KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell — pledged $100 million to equity and education.
Unlike historic civil rights movements that brought changes to singular policies or laws like public accommodations and open housing in the 1960s, this moment seemed to be reaching deep into mainstream culture, said Cunningham of the NAACP.
"When we look at these demonstrations today, yes, it's leading to law enforcement changes, but it has opened the floodgates for other areas. It has shown people the need for broader change. The culture is changing."
He added, "I think when you look at the demonstrations of the 1960s to end segregation, these demonstrations today will rank with them as being a major moment for social change."
Others have remarked on how they've seen the protests spark conversation across Louisville. Black residents have been approached by white colleagues for the first time. In Deibert's church, parents are asking about how to talk to their children about racism.
Neal has seen it too, firsthand.
"I was sitting in the eye doctor's chair. All of sudden, he says, 'That was murder.' And he went on to talk about George Floyd. I've never had a discussion like this with this guy. He's been doing my eyes for years. Never. I was amazed. And I was hopeful," he said.
And it felt emblematic last week as Louisville neared the end of the tumultuous month, and Louisville state Rep. Charles Booker, who represents the West End and was a regular among the protesters, surged against his well-funded rival in the Democratic primary for Senate.
Neal said he hopes that Louisville's "moral moment" will translate into real policies for change, ranging from considering the racial impact of legislative efforts such as bills on criminal justice to improving racial disparities in health care.
"Protests translate into policy to be useful and be real," he said.
It may yet.
A group of 50 predominantly Black community leaders has called for a $50 million Black community fund that could be spent on affordable housing, small business support and mental health care in predominantly Black neighborhoods.
A coalition of faith leaders in Louisville also issued demands, including divesting a significant portion of the city's $190 million police budget to instead invest in health, education, transportation, housing, food security and living wage jobs to benefit Black communities.
On Thursday, Louisville Metro Council didn't "defund" the police department, as protesters have demanded, but did require police to spend more money on recruiting a more diverse force, add training and explore co-responder models that could send behavioral health professionals on calls with officers.
It also allocated money to a not-yet-created civilian police oversight body, and millions of dollars toward disadvantaged neighborhoods, including funding of the affordable housing trust fund.
The protests have "caused our policy-makers to stop and reflect, and realize people want real change here," Clayton said.
It's not clear how long protests will last. Some recall the Occupy movement, which for a time around 2011 was a feature in Louisville and other U.S. cities, but did little to reduce economic inequality before it dwindled.
One thing is certain — as marches continue every night and have adopted a block party-vibe complete with the smell of meat on a grill — things can't return to the way they were before, activists say.
"It amazes me that they're still there now," said Palmer, Taylor's mother. "I think that this has got to be some sort of real change to stop the people. It's, it's not enough to just put a Band-Aid on things anymore."
Protesters have said it over and over: They'll be on the streets until their demands are met. At the very least, they want the officers involved in Taylor's death — Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove — fired, charged and imprisoned.
"The one thing that I'm afraid of," said protester Michael Chism, "if they don't prosecute them three offices, what's gonna happen to this city that I love? I don't want it to turn into Ferguson ... but if they let them three cops off, trust and believe, it's gonna be worse."
For Louisville to mend its history of racism, Drake said, it has to do a better job of admitting it and actively working to fix it. And if the officers aren't fired and charged, she thinks people will still be on the streets a month from now.
Going back to the way things were, for some, is not an option.
"Black people," Bussey said, "don't have anything to go back to."
Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@gannett.com. Follow him on Twitter @chris_kenning
Find more inside
Timeline: 30 days of change and turmoil that rocked Louisville. 10A
Find more inside
Portraits of a protest: Here are some of the people marching in Breonna Taylor's name. Forum, 1E
"It was organic. It was a spon-taneous cry of enough was enough. This was intolerable."
State Sen. Gerald Neal
Longtime civil rights proponent who represents West Louisville
"You need officers to step up and tell fellow officers that racist jokes will not be tolerated and are unaccept-able. We need officers to step up and intervene when they see another officer verbally and physically abusing another citizen."
Andre Bottoms
Veteran Black Louisville police officer who retired after 28 years on the force amid the protests
Protesters surround Louisville Metro Police Department officer Galen Hinshaw in front of Bearno's restaurant on May 28 in Louisville. Five people, including Julian De La Cruz, Ricky McClellan, far right, and Darrin Lee Jr., center, right, linked arms to keep the crowd from getting to Hinshaw.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Protesters square off against police on 5th Street on May 29.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Police move protesters back as they tried to move their patrol cars west on Main Street in front of the KFC Yum Center on May 28.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Protester Shannyn White wears a bandage on her head where she was struck by a police projectile during a confrontation with police on June 4. "It hurt really bad and it was scary, but I'd do it all over again," White said.
$$$
