Louisville shop alleges mayor issued 'stand down' order
Tobin, Ben
17 Aug 2020
A downtown Louisville business is suing the city for more than $85,000 it allegedly suffered in damages during the first few nights of Breonna Taylor protests.
In a lawsuit filed Aug. 11 in Jefferson Circuit Court, JJ Wig Shop, 525 S. Fourth St., claims that several Louisville Metro Police Department officers told some business owners on its street, but not its owner, that the evening of May 29 would "was going to involve potential looting and rioting."
The officers also allegedly told businesses that the police department had received a "stand down" order from Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer, meaning they could not protect businesses or property, according to the lawsuit.
"Despite active intelligence that property damage began to occur to downtown businesses on Fourth Street, Mayor Fischer persisted in his stand down order, directing the LMPD not to intervene with the theft and destruction of downtown businesses, even though police officers were in close proximity to these businesses as they were being broken into and looted," the lawsuit claims.
JJ Wig Shop said in the lawsuit that it had security footage of its glass being smashed by looters shortly before midnight on May 29, and that LMPD officers were in the vicinity but did not intervene because they were following Fischer's orders.
According to the lawsuit, destruction of property, looting and theft continued at JJ Wig Shop for four hours. The following day, the lawsuit says, the owners of the shop assessed damages and noted large amounts of inventory were stolen, windows and other property were destroyed, and it "took months to rebuild."
JJ Wig shop is seeking a jury trial and to be rewarded roughly $85,000 in damages. The lawsuit also seeks class-action status, as "hundreds of businesses" in Louisville incurred damages.
Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter told The Courier Journal on Wednesday that "we are not familiar with this lawsuit," but denied the accusation of a "stand down" order being issued.
"There was never a 'stand down' order," Porter wrote in an email. "LMPD's goal is always to de-escalate situations wherever possible. And tactical decisions are made by LMPD command staff, not the Mayor."
Protesters have taken to the streets for more than 75 days to demand justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who was unarmed when shot and killed by police inside her home in March.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, who will make the decision on whether to charge the officers involved in the shooting, told The Courier Journal this month that his office is waiting for information on ballistics tests the FBI has been conducting. He did not provide an estimate when his team will complete its investigation and release results.
$$$
