What happens next if officers in Taylor shooting aren't charged?
24 July 2020
We need to talk.
What's going to happen to our community if Attorney General Daniel Cameron decides he can't charge the police officers involved in Breonna Taylor's death with murder?
What's going to happen if he charges just one or two of them with minor crimes?
What if the toughest charge against any officer is a wanton endangerment count against the cop who fired blindly into Taylor's apartment through a window that had its shades pulled?
What are we going to do?
The entire discussion right now is about charges against the three officers who were assigned to raid Taylor's apartment just after midnight on March 13.
No justice, no peace.
We've got a group of armed militia coming in this weekend to protest that the officers should face felony charges.
The narrative of the protesters so far has been that the police murdered her.
But what if the cops were just three schlubs who arrived for work one day and were told that it was their job that day to raid an apartment after midnight. What if they were simply told the tenant there was the former girlfriend of a drug dealer who used the apartment to stash drugs?
What if they didn't know any better?
And what if they showed up at the apartment like they were ordered, carrying with them a judge's search warrant they believed was obtained legally? What if they busted down the door as they have been trained to do and what if someone fired at them, wounding one of them?
And what if they returned fire?
Breonna Taylor should not be dead.
None of these events should have ever happened.
We don't know everything there is to know about Taylor's death because neither the city nor the state has released any investigative reports.
But what we do know is that the process was flawed from the beginning when Detective Joshua Jaynes went to Jefferson Circuit Judge Mary Shaw and told her – allegedly untruthfully – that the U.S. Postal Inspector said Taylor had been receiving packages believed to be drugs for her old boyfriend, an alleged drug dealer.
It was flawed when Shaw acted on intelligence she knew was two months old when police came to her and gave Jaynes the warrant.
The process was flawed when police burst into the apartment in the middle of the night using a "no-knock warrant" – whether or not they announced their presence – rather than at a more reasonable hour where the tenants wouldn't have been as likely to think it was a home invasion.
And the process was flawed when the police went months and months without acknowledging they screwed up and, along with prosecutors, continued to press charges against ... for taking a shot at police when they burst into the apartment.
And it was flawed when police waited an eternity to give aid to Taylor as she lay bleeding and dying where she fell.
That's the problem.
There is a lot of blame to go around.
With so many errors – procedural and otherwise – and if the three police officers who raided the apartment generally followed procedure, at least up until the shooting, it's going to be difficult for Cameron to charge any of them with murder.
While it's hard to blame Kenny Walker — who was with Taylor in her apartment — for shooting at police when they entered the apartment, at the same time, it's going to be difficult for any prosecutor to obtain indictments against police officers who killed someone when they were fired on first.
It just is.
It's hard to believe, if the facts are what we understand them to be, the officers being charged with murder.
So, if that's the case, how do we move forward?
Do we see continued protests in Louisville, potentially with more broken windows, wrecked cars and spray-painted buildings?
Or do we somehow work together to fix the systemic racism that plays a role how police have operated in Louisville for years and how they'll continue to operate if things don't change.
The Louisville Metro Council took a step forward when it outlawed no-knock warrants a few weeks ago.
So far, Mayor Greg Fischer has fired former Police Chief Steve Conrad.
His acting Police Chief Robert Schroeder fired officer Brett Hankison, who in addition to allegedly firing blindly into Taylor's apartment has been accused of sexual assault.
Fischer suspended no knock warrants before the Metro Council outlawed them, and he ordered body cameras be worn whenever a search warrant is served.
And he's hired a Chicago company to come in and study what is wrong with the police department.
But the protesters are going to want more. They're going to want proof that the department is changing.
And the LMPD's heavy-handed approach to the protesters, including the boneheaded decision to charge 87 of them with felonies for protesting at Cameron's home, doesn't instill confidence that is changing.
And it's got to change.
Fischer's got a limited time to figure this out.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
$$$
