Shooting victim remembered for 'sense of justice' for others
Ladd, Sarah; Aulbach, Lucas
29 June 2020
Night after night, Tyler Gerth snapped photos of the Louisville protests.
The mostly black-and-white frames shared to Instagram showed the heartbreak, occasional triumph and tirelessness that have defined the monthlong demonstrations: the marching, the singing, the hugging. The chanting and the silence.
Gerth, 27, was fatally shot Saturday night at a protest in Jefferson Square Park, the unintended victim of a man who got in a dispute at the protest site and came back with a gun, protesters at the scene said.
Steven Lopez, 23, is facing charges of murder and first-degree wanton endangerment, Louisville Metro Police officials said Sunday after releasing his arrest citation.
Gerth had become a vocal supporter of ongoing protests against racism and police brutality and, his family said, a strong supporter of the Black Lives Matter movement.
His godfather is Joe Gerth, a Courier Journal columnist. And Tyler Gerth also was a godfather to the Louisville columnist's daughter.
The family said in a statement that they are "devastated that his life was taken was from us far too soon."
"Tyler was incredibly kind, tender-hearted and generous, holding deep convictions and faith," they wrote.
"It was this sense of justice that drove Tyler to be part of the peaceful demonstrations advocating for the destruction of the systemic racism within our society's systems. This, combined with his passion of photography led to a strong need within him to be there, documenting the movement, capturing and communicating the messages of peace and justice."
"While we cannot fathom this life without our happy, inquisitive, hardworking, funny, precious Tyler," they added, "we pray that his death would be a turning point and catalyst for peace in the city he loved so much. We ask for your prayers and that the Lord would draw close in our sorrow, but we also ask that his death is not just another statistic of senseless violence."
They also quoted Martin Luther King Jr., concluding their statement with: "Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only light can do that."
The budding photographer graduated from Trinity High School in 2011 and the University of Kentucky in 2016 with a degree in agricultural economics, according to the Gerth family.
After working and living in Arkansas, he came back to Louisville, worked for Papa Johns in quality assurance and became serious about photography.
In addition to protest photography, Gerth captured striking images of nature, from the mountains in Yellowstone National Park to the Bourbon District in Louisville.
He was a stellar mentor as part of the Big Brothers Big Sisters of Kentuckiana as well, according to agency CEO Jeri Swinton.
"He not only believed in racial justice, like his father who is also a Big Brother, he put his passion into action by mentoring," Swinton wrote in an email.
Gerth would have turned 28 on July 3. A vigil was held Sunday evening in Jefferson Square Park to honor him, as well as Breonna Taylor and David McAtee, who were killed by Louisville police and Kentucky National Guard, respectively.
Many on social media lamented Gerth's death, including Matt Jones and NBC's Howard Fineman, with the latter writing on Twitter that Gerth was "a hero" for being at the park "to stand against racism and to photograph history."
His death was also acknowledged by several politicians, including U.S. Senate candidates Amy McGrath and Charles Booker.
Sadiqa Reynolds, CEO of the Louisville Urban League, wrote on social media, "How many more parents have to lose their children in Louisville? We have to do more — faster. We can't go on like this. We are piling trauma on top of trauma all because we can't get justice."
The Louisville activist finished the post off with: "#JusticeForBre #ForDavid #ForTyler #ForLouisville."
$$$
