Is Booker's sudden popularity enough?
Watkins, Morgan
20 June 2020
A month ago, retired Marine and Democrat Amy McGrath's nomination to run against Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell this November was widely seen as inevitable.
Then state Rep. Charles Booker surged into the spotlight, scoring endorsements from big-deal politicians and groups, a rush of campaign donations and major social media buzz.
But can he actually turn this sudden wave of popularity into a victory over McGrath in Tuesday's primary election?
Political watchers say she's still the front-runner, but Booker is finally, truly in the game. An upset isn't likely, they cautioned, but it is possible.
"He has surged at just the right moment," said Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Politics. "Is it large enough to overcome her lead? Maybe, although I wouldn't bet on it. ... It's one thing to surge. It's another thing to win."
However, University of Louisville political science professor Dewey Clayton said Booker's unabashedly progressive platform and perceived authenticity is reverberating.
"I've not seen, in quite some time, someone gain momentum this late in the campaign," he said. "I think it's going to be a close race."
Booker entered the U.S. Senate race in January, about six months after McGrath and Mike Broihier — a retired Marine and Kentucky farmer who's another notable candidate in the crowded Democratic primary — kicked off their own campaigns.
From the start, Booker said he planned to win by building a grassroots movement around his candidacy, which focused on a vision of ending generational poverty and promoted progressive policies such as "Medicare for All" and the Green New Deal.
But it wasn't until Louisville's protests against racism and police brutality began in late May that the movement Booker talked about building started to noticeably emerge.
Booker quickly joined protesters in the streets of his hometown, where people were (and still are) demanding justice for Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who died in March after Louisville police officers shot her in her home.
Booker's participation in the protests drew attention and support within and outside of Kentucky, spurring speculation that McGrath might not be a shoo-in.
"What Democratic Party primary voters are learning is that they have a choice to make, and previously they may have thought the McGrath nomination was inevitable," University of Kentucky political science professor Stephen Voss said.
Joy Simic, 47, of Louisville, who went to see Booker at a meet and greet this week, said his decision to join the protests mattered to her.
"I know what it's like to be that minority," she said. "To always feel like you're never being heard."
Ali Gautier, who attended the same event as Simic, said she showed up for Booker because he already did that for her by joining the protests.
"Breonna Taylor was a 26-year-old Black woman living in Louisville, and so am I," she said. "Show up for who shows up for you."
National figures, including U.S. Sens. Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, recently endorsed Booker.
So did Kentucky politicians, such as former Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes.
McGrath has earned endorsements too, including many from unions. She also has the backing of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which supports Democrats in Senate races nationwide, and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer.
Endorsements are unlikely to be game-changers, Voss said, but they can increase a candidate's name recognition and voters' perception of whether they're a viable option.
McGrath is better-known in Kentucky than Booker, Clayton said, but he suggested that carries pros and cons.
Clayton said McGrath stumbled when, for example, she said she'd have voted to confirm controversial U.S. Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was accused of sexual assault, before quickly reversing her position.
"She does have more name recognition, but it's not all positive," Clayton said.
When it comes to finances, McGrath still has a major advantage despite a late-breaking boost in donations for Booker.
Booker's campaign manager, Colin Lauderdale, said about $2.4 million in donations flowed into the campaign's coffers since June began. That's about three times as much money as federal data shows it had raised as of June 3.
However, McGrath has brought in over $40 million since she launched her Senate run last summer and had about $19.3 million of cash on hand as of June 3.
Her hefty financial lead doesn't doom Booker, though.
Voss said it's the challenger's resources — not the front-runner's — that matter.
"Once he gets enough money to get a message out there, to start distributing ads and setting up social media outreach — once he's being treated as viable by major players — then you have a live race," Voss said.
Booker has taken advantage of his recent swarm of attention and donations.
He put out his first TV ad earlier this month and kicked off a series of outdoor events this week in cities around the state.
But McGrath is keeping up the pressure. Her campaign spent over $3 million on ads for the last week of the race.
Booker fans got some good news this week: A new poll conducted by Oakland, California-based Civiqs showed him with a lead over McGrath, 44% to 36%.
But a McGrath spokesman countered that her campaign has three new internal polls that showed McGrath holding a double-digit lead over Booker.
This election has been greatly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed it from May to June. Mail-in voting has been vastly expanded, and the number of places where people can vote in-person was drastically reduced.
How that will affect the candidates is a wild card, Clayton said. The procedural changes may give McGrath an edge because additional hurdles to voting can especially hurt young and minority voters, upon whom Booker likely is depending.
And Voss said some voters may have filled out their mail-in ballots early, before Booker's momentum grew.
"The nature of how we're voting this time limits how much bang Booker can get for his buck with these late campaign developments," he said.
Regardless, Clayton said Booker is a serious contender.
"His message is resonating with people," he said. "And Booker has jumped out here and seized the moment."
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Senate hopeful Charles Booker speaks at a June protest in Louisville over Breonna Taylor's killing.
$$$
