Black business leaders seek investment
Tobin, Ben
04 Sep 2020
In 100 days of protesting over the death of Breonna Taylor, the historical inequities facing Louisville's Black population have been laid bare.
Now it's time for the city and Louisville-based companies to make an extra effort to support Black business development "so the work that the protesters do is long-lasting," said Dave Christopher, the executive director and founder of the Academy of Music Production Education and Development in Louisville.
"When we look at justice for Breonna Taylor — that day will come and go. And we have to think about what happens the day after that," he said. "... Black business ownership, economic power and independence are the only way that we'll be able to get out of this."
According to Louisville Forward, the city's economic development agency, 2.4% of the city's businesses are Black-owned. Yet Black people make up 23.5% of the city's population.
In 2017, the median income of Black households in Louisville was nearly 40% below median income in the city overall, according to a 2019 report by the University of Louisville's Center for Environmental Policy and Management and the Metropolitan Housing Coalition.
Christopher is one of several signees and leaders on the "A Path Forward for Louisville" petition, sent to Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer and Metro Council President David James in June.
Signed by dozens of Black community leaders, the petition calls for a plethora of actions for the city to take, including divesting in Louisville Metro Police, and creating a $50 million "Black Community Fund" to support small businesses and affordable housing.
Christopher has been helping to lead the charge on the Black business development demands listed in the petition. He said he has met with Louisville Forward and has been encouraged by some of the conversation, as well as commitments from Louisville-based corporations.
On Wednesday, Yum Brands announced a pledge of $6 million to help the Black community in Louisville.
Tanika Bryant, the executive director of the nonprofit Black Business Association in Louisville, said the protests have generated more interest and support, particularly among non-Black community members, for the organization's Buy Black Lou initiative, designed to support Black-owned businesses.
The Black Business Association has been partnering with the city's Build Back Better, Together initiative, which was formed to address systemic racism and economic recovery amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Bryant said.
She said she's been encouraged by conversations in the initiative about removing barriers surrounding Black-owned businesses. However, Bryant said the city and companies have had "historic philanthropic neglect and favoritism" and that Black-owned businesses "need that same financial backing and support" as non-Black-owned businesses.
"The city, as well as these major corporations and non-Black led organizations in the city — like Ford, Humana, UPS and Churchill Downs, to name a few — must make stronger commitments to directly invest unrestricted funds in us as much as they invest in non-Black organizations if we are going to level the playing field," Bryant said.
In addition to drawing more attention to supporting Black-owned organizations, the protests have also drawn more attention to the perilous state of downtown Louisville businesses, particularly after the first weekend of protests resulted in smashed windows and looting at some shops.
Sam Cruz, the co-owner of Against the Grain Brewery and Smokehouse at 401 E. Main St., temporarily closed the establishment at the start of July. He said that "the primary issues that downtown businesses are dealing with is ultimately the response to the COVID 19 pandemic."
"The nail in the coffin is the protest," Cruz added. "It's not to diminish the value of the cause. But, those things are unpredictable."
John Shaw-Woo, the founder and CEO of the NOIR Black Chamber of Commerce, a nonprofit community development entity based in Louisville that has roughly 140 members nationwide, said protests in Louisville and nationwide have "really opened the eyes of individuals to systemic racism and the true issues of America."
"I think people feel optimistic that now that this has been brought to the forefront," Shaw-Woo said. "Now, it's time for us to develop the road map so we can move forward without any barriers."
Shaw-Woo said he wants to help protesters through programming.
NOIR, which was founded in July 2019 and is seeking corporate support, according to Shaw-Woo, offers various consortia and programs geared at Black business education and development. He also said that greater implementation of Louisville's citywide Resilience Strategy, released in June of last year, could help lift Black businesses in the city.
Christopher said it is essential for protesters and young leaders like himself "to keep our foot on the gas."
"We aren't broken. We're not incapable. We can run businesses. We can do anything we want to."
Sarah Ladd contributed to this report. Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
Protesters raise their fists in the air during a demonstration against police violence and racial injustice in Louisville at the beginning of June.
$$$
