Looters attempt to destroy dream
05 June 2020
Editor's note: George Stinson, a well-known Louisville businessman, confronted looters at his Fourth Street operation as protests turned violent downtown late last Friday.
The demonstrations over the death of 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman shot during a police raid in March, were mostly peaceful. But a spree of vandalism and looting damaged businesses downtown and in selected locations around the city.
Here is his first person account, first posted on Facebook, of what happened:
I have always been an advocate for the fair treatment and equal rights for all individuals. As a member of a minority group because of my sexual orientation, and having been the chairman for the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights for 10 years, I have an understanding of the need to expose and work for change in regards to inequality and unwarranted oppression.
Through several decades, I have been the owner and developer of several downtown businesses. Over 20 years ago, I had a dream of recapturing a bygone vibrant Fourth Street. Successfully contributing to that dream, I developed the old Kentucky Theater on Fourth Street into a multi-business facility with a Bagel & Coffee shop, Marketplace restaurant, Theater Square Wine & Spirits, a yoga studio and also law offices.
On Friday evening I experienced what I have never experienced. I watched as an attempt to destroy the dream took place. A protest started out with a tone of peaceful demonstration. It was heartwarming to see the hundreds of people that supported the rightful cause.
However, individuals bearing hammers, baseball bats, and who knows what else they had in their backpacks, had absolutely no intention of keeping it a focused and peaceful demonstration. I view those individuals that were in the black Ninja outfits and toting weapons as nothing more than opportunist vandals and thieves.
Along with many other businesses and properties in downtown Louisville, our property and business — The Marketplace Restaurant and Theater Square Wine and Spirits — were vandalized and looted.
I was notified by the alarm company that the alarm at the Marketplace Wine Shop was going off. I rushed to the Wine Shop to find the large storefront windows busted out, (with) groups of masked individuals crawling in and out of the windows with hands and arms filled with bottles of wine, spirits and other merchandise.
The individuals were not just one gender or one race. However, It did seem that the majority were juveniles or young adults.
I started grabbing the product from their hands. As I went to grab a basket that one of them had filled with product, I was attacked from the back and knocked to the ground by two others. Two African American men persuaded the men to stop their attack on me.
Bleeding, sore and fearing for my life, I retreated to the car and locked the doors as I watched the destruction and thievery by hooded, masked thieves continue.
There was nothing I could do. I finally left and went home leaving the devastation physically, but mentally it wouldn't leave my mind.
I got very little sleep.
In the morning, I went back to Marketplace and got the full picture of the destruction. It was major damage and major theft. I called to have the building secured and boarded up. I started sweeping up the broken glass.
Amid all of this horribleness, I looked up and saw strangers, various races and ages, with dustpans and brooms in their hands, going to businesses asking if they could help in the cleanup. These were the local Louisvillians wanting to help.
This hit me right in the heart. This was the Louisville that I have always known and loved.
Yes, the experience was horrific, but the care and concern shown by my fellow Louisvillians gave me that hope again that we will continue to get through trying situations together.
To those kind individuals, thank you for caring.
Your Turn
George Stinson
Guest columnist
$$$
