Johnson pleads not guilty in protest shooting case
Aulbach, Lucas; Mencarini, Matt
26 Sep 2020
Larynzo Johnson, the man accused of shooting and injuring two Louisville Metro Police Department officers amid protests Wednesday night, pleaded not guilty at his arraignment Friday morning.
Johnson, 26, is charged with two counts of first-degree assault on a police officer and 14 counts of wanton endangerment related to a police officer.
Bond was set at $1 million, up from the initial amount of $750,000, said R. Zachary Meihaus, an attorney who represented Johnson for the arraignment only. He added that Johnson will be appointed a public defender.
A judge set the next court hearing for Oct. 5.
Meihaus declined to comment on the merits of the case, aside from saying Johnson is innocent until proven guilty, because he has not reviewed any evidence.
But he pointed to the different ways Johnson and the three officers involved in the Breonna Taylor shooting have been treated by the criminal justice system.
"The level of care and investigation that was given to the officers involved in Breonna Taylor's shooting prior to any indictments coming down, if Larynzo Johnson was afforded that same courtesy, he would not be sitting in custody charged the 14 counts of wanton endangerment, two counts of assault (first degree) with a $1 million bond," he said. "I mean, that's about the most I can tell you. And that's how I feel."
The criminal investigation into Taylor's shooting went on for months and involved ballistics analysis by the Kentucky State Police and the FBI.
A grand jury on Wednesday indicted one of the three officers involved in the fatal shooting, but the charges weren't directly related to Taylor's death, rather for firing into her neighbors' apartments.
Former Detective Brett Hankison, who was fired in June, faces three wanton endangerment charges and posted $15,000 bond on Wednesday. The other two officers – Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove – remain on administrative reassignment while internal investigations continue.
Matt Mencarini: 502-582-4221; mmencarini@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @MattMencarini. Lucas Aulbach: laulbach@courier-journal.com; 502-582-4649; Twitter: @LucasAulbach.
Larynzo Johnson is arrested near the intersection of South First Street and East Broadway on Wednesday in downtown Louisville.
$$$
