Grimes endorses Booker in US Senate race
Watkins, Morgan
18 June 2020
State Rep. Charles Booker's U.S. Senate campaign picked up a new endorsement this week from former Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, a high-profile Democrat with a complicated political history.
"Our country needs extraordinary leaders in order to solve the monumental problems facing us," Grimes said in a statement Tuesday. "I believe that my friend Charles Booker is one of those leaders."
Meanwhile, another Democrat running in this month's U.S. Senate primary — retired Marine Mike Broihier — scored a notable pledge of support from famed Kentucky novelist, farmer and environmental activist Wendell Berry on Monday.
"I endorse Mike Broihier — I approve of him because of his responsible awareness of the peril that now hangs over agriculture and rural life in the United States and his support for farmers and particularly for small farmers," Berry said in a statement.
Broihier also announced on Tuesday that several African American community leaders in Louisville, including CEO John Shaw-Woo of NOIR Black Chamber of Commerce, have endorsed him.
These endorsements come as Broihier and Booker enter the final week of campaigning before the June 23 primary election, which each hopes will give them the shot to face Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell in November.
To do that, they'll have to not only win more votes than each other, but also more votes than Amy McGrath, a retired Marine who has raised millions of dollars for her campaign and is considered the front-runner in this primary.
This week, McGrath and Booker both put out campaign ads about the ongoing protests against racism and police brutality in Louisville and other cities across the U.S.
Booker has attracted local and national attention recently, in large part because he has been a vocal and visible participant in the Louisville protests.
Here are key details about these late developments on the campaign trail:
Grimes' endorsement Grimes served two terms as secretary of state, the latter of which ended late last year. She launched GoVoteKY.com, the state's first online voter registration system, and worked to encourage voter turnout throughout her tenure.
Booker's campaign emphasized Grimes' efforts to boost voter registration in its announcement of her endorsement.
"Breaking down barriers to democracy has been my top priority as a legislator and advocate, because I know how vital it is that every Kentuckian has their voice heard," Booker said in a statement. "Secretary Grimes has been a champion for Kentucky families, and it was an honor to work with her in the fight to expand voting access."
However, Grimes' leadership as secretary of state was marked by some controversy, including accusations that she amassed too much power over the Kentucky State Board of Elections.
Investigative reporting by The Lexington Herald-Leader and ProPublica found Grimes' staff looked up hundreds of voters, including Kentucky politicians, in a voter registration database to which her office had access, among other issues their coverage examined.
Grimes denied using the database for political purposes and pushed back against the notion that her degree of control over the board of elections was inappropriate.
Grimes herself ran against McConnell in 2014 but lost that race. Now, Booker has her support as he tries to do what she couldn't: unseat Kentucky's longtime senator, who now holds the powerful post of Senate majority leader.
University of Kentucky political science professor Stephen Voss said Grimes' endorsement could give Booker a boost, although he cautioned that most research suggests endorsements generally "don't make much difference one way or the other."
However, Voss indicated an endorsement from a prominent politician like Grimes does make it more likely voters will know who Booker is and may increase voters' perception that he's a feasible candidate even though McGrath is better-known and better-funded.
"An endorsement is unlikely to be a game-changer," he said. "But given (Booker's) unique circumstance, likely this endorsement is helpful. He's attempting a come-from-behind uprising, and that sort of candidate does benefit from the extra name recognition and the perception of viability."
As for the controversies during Grimes' time in public office, Voss said he doesn't think that will cause voters to view Booker negatively because of her endorsement.
"Nothing in Grimes' past is toxic enough that it should in any way splash onto Booker," he said.
Protest-centric campaign ads Booker and McGrath introduced ads this week about the protests sparked by the death of George Floyd, a 46-year-old Black man who died in May after a former Minneapolis police officer, Derek Chauvin — who has since been fired and charged with second-degree murder — kneeled on his neck for nearly nine minutes.
The death of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and ER technician who died after she was shot by police officers in her Louisville home in March, also has received attention and outrage both locally and nationally during the protests.
In her new ad, McGrath expressed dismay over Floyd's death and promised voters: "As your senator, I will stand up to any president who treats people as less than human."
But Booker's new ad juxtaposed McGrath's explanation during a June 1 debate that she didn't attend the first few days of protests because she "had some family things going on" with footage of Booker speaking to and walking with protesters in Louisville.
McGrath later attended a vigil for Taylor in Lexington as well as an interfaith gathering in Louisville, according to one of her recent posts on social media.
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26.
State Rep. Charles Booker, a Democrat who is running for U.S. Senate, smiles while speaking at a rally at Highland Coffee Company on Bardstown Road in Louisville on Wednesday.
$$$
