Senior citizens charged after sit-in on AG's lawn
Duvall, Tessa; Tobin, Ben; Austin, Emma
21 Aug 2020
Police charged seven senior citizens with criminal trespassing and arrested one of them during a Thursday morning sit-in on the front lawn of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's Louisville home.
The seniors were hosting the sit-in to demand justice for Breonna Taylor when a number of police officers responded to the scene.
Dotti Lockhart, 78, said the seniors arrived at 10 a.m. and had committed to staying for an hour in honor of Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman fatally shot by Louisville police in March.
"We were threatened with arrest at 10:01, and we were told to leave immediately," Lockhart said.
Just before 10:50 a.m., police approached protesters sitting on Cameron's lawn in chairs and handed them citations.
John Mills, deputy chief for the Graymoor-Devondale Police Department, confirmed six people received citations for criminal trespassing and moved off of the lawn. The seventh person "decided they wanted to be arrested," he said.
Mary Holden, 68, appeared to be knitting while sitting on the lawn before she was arrested. She was arrested and charged with criminal trespassing in the third degree, according to the citation, which said she was sitting in a lawn chair and refused to leave the property at 11 a.m. before her arrest.
The protesters carried signs in support of justice for Taylor, with messages such as "Listen to your elders, Black Lives Matter" and "Grannies for justice for Breonna." Additional seniors sat on the road so as not to be arrested, citing health concerns.
The final seven protesters on the lawn had a combined age of 514 years, according to one of the organizers.
It is the second such protest at Cameron's home as the public awaits his decision regarding charges against officers connected to Taylor's death.
Julie Driscoll, 79, said the "long, long wait" for a decision from the attorney general has hurt the city, state and country.
"I just hope and pray they'll meet some of the demands, but ... I fear they won't," said Driscoll, who is a member of Sisters of Charity of Nazareth. "I fear there won't be charges because they'll say they had a warrant and they were operating in self-defense."
On the night Taylor was killed, her boyfriend Kenneth Walker fired one shot in self-defense, believing the police officers entering Taylor's apartment were intruders, according to his attorney. Officers then returned more than 20 bullets, including the five that killed Taylor.
"I couldn't imagine anybody coming into my home, and there was one shot at police, and then they dumped 20 bullets there," Driscoll said. "I can't comprehend."
Dotti Lockhart's husband, Bob Lockhart, 79, said he went to the sit-in to address the need for justice.
"There needs to be an accounting for all the wrongs that we've done over all these years, and this is a way we could do it," he said. "We were willing to risk arrest."
In July, 87 protesters were arrested on Cameron's lawn, including an NFL player and reality TV stars.
Cameron condemned the last demonstration, saying that "justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property."
"It's achieved by examining the facts in an impartial and unbiased manner," he said at the time. "That is exactly what we are going to do in this investigation."
A spokeswoman for Cameron did not reply to a Courier Journal email seeking comment on Thursday.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Reach Emma Austin at eaustin@gannett.com or on Twitter at @emmacaustin. Reach Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen.
Protester Brad Castleberry raises his fist in support of Breonna Taylor and the Black Lives Matter movement while he is given a citation. He, his wife, Soni Castleberry, and five others silently protested on the lawn of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's house. The group was there on a sunny Thursday morning to demand Cameron complete his investigation into the killing of Taylor at the hands of police.
Photos by Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Protester Mary Holden is arrested without handcuffs after she and six others trespassed on the lawn of Cameron's Louisville house for a silent protest to demand the Kentucky attorney general complete his investigation.
$$$
