We must create real community policing
CLOUT EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
05 June 2020
CLOUT (Citizens of Louisville Organized and United Together) would like to express our deep sorrow and anger over the tragic killing of Breonna Taylor by Louisville Metro Police Department officers in March of this year. We consider this incident to be symptomatic of critical failures in law enforcement practice and accountability. We also grieve over the death of another beloved community member, David McAtee, due to the response of law enforcement.
It is unfortunate that nonviolent protests conducted by many passionate Louisvillians have been marred by certain individuals perpetrating violence and destruction in our city, and by the police response.
As an organization, CLOUT has been working proactively for the past three years to press Mayor Greg Fischer and LMPD to put into place new policies and practices that would avoid such tragic results in police use of force. We have conducted extensive research and convened dozens of meetings of key stakeholders on these issues over the past three years.
After our initial year-and-a-half of effort, with continuous resistance by Mayor Fischer and LMPD Chief Steve Conrad to implementing our recommended changes, or even to meeting with us, we delivered in person to the Mayor's office more than 600 cards signed by CLOUT participants asking him to meet. He finally agreed, which began a series of three meetings with him and his office that still, however, ended with no movement on his or LMPD's part.
Therefore, at CLOUT's Nehemiah Action Assembly in March of last year, with nearly 1,100 Louisville citizens present, we gained the support of several members of Metro Council, including Councilman Brent Ackerson, chairperson of the Metro Council's Government Oversight Committee, who agreed to have CLOUT leaders come before his committee to share with them our research, our recommendations, and our difficulties in working with Mayor Fischer and LMPD.
The result was that, in April of last year, we made a detailed presentation to what became a joint meeting of that committee and the Council's Public Safety Committee. Our recommendations that night included new language in LMPD's policy manuals regarding the use of de-escalation strategies, as well as the creation by the city of an Office of Inspector General, a stronger version of the current Citizens Commission on Police Accountability (CCPA), or some similar solution that would provide strong, external accountability to LMPD in relation to use of force incidents. As part of that recommendation, we presented our extensive research into the deficiencies of the current CCPA.
As a result of our presentation and Metro Council members' statements of support, Chief Conrad agreed to meet with CLOUT and to discuss our recommendations. After several meetings with Conrad and other members of the LMPD command staff throughout 2019 to negotiate new policy language regarding LMPD's use of de-escalation tactics, we finalized an agreement for new language to be included in both LMPD's Standard Operating Procedures Manual and their Professional Standards Unit Operations Manual. This new language went into effect in November of last year.
Recent events reveal that the implementation of that language and its related de-escalation strategies is very much a work in progress, and that much more accountability to it is needed. We are in ongoing communication with key leaders of Metro Council, the mayor's office and other community stakeholders to provide CLOUT's research and experience as that process continues, and as new structures for police accountability are developed.
Also, looking toward the future, it will be important for LMPD to work with grassroots stakeholders who have expertise related to LMPD's past efforts to implement community-oriented policing (COP). CLOUT worked diligently with LMPD to develop a strategic plan to reform the department through the use of COP nearly 15 years ago, but it was never implemented with fidelity.
It is time to revisit that plan once again, and to get it right this time.
CLOUT Executive Committee: Rev. Reginald Barnes (Brown Memorial CME Church), co-president; Mike Kolb (St. John Paul II Catholic Church), co-president; Jane Buckley (First Unitarian Church), vice-president; John Bates (St. Edward Catholic Church), treasurer; Tom Gardner (St. Francis of Assisi Catholic Church), recording secretary; Karen Williams (Centennial Olivet Baptist Church), corresponding secretary; Evelyn Clark (Bethel Baptist Church), at-large; Jimmy Mills (Mosaic United Methodist Church), at-large.
$$$
