Now, more than ever, let's unite
27 Sep 2020
Let's just say it – 2020 has been the most demanding, challenging, heart-wrenching, divisive, surprising, and yet at sometimes, inspirational year we've ever experienced. I wonder what history books will say about this year and how future generations will see how we responded and navigated through a global pandemic followed up by unprecedented social and racial unrest?
But in many ways, Metro United Way was ready to "meet this moment." When the COVID-19 pandemic hit, we were at the center of our community's response. Our 2-1-1 call center and United Community data gave our community unique insight into pockets of urgent need. We brought together 40+ philanthropies, created a process for coordinating emergency funding and helped co-found the OneLouisville Fund that invested more than $10 million in our community, in addition to rapidly deploying $2.2 million of our own emergency funds. We provided more than three tons of supplies to nonprofits on the frontlines. And most recently, we helped launch the Eviction Prevention Center, powered by United Community.
As issues of social justice have come to increasing prominence, we were similarly ready. We were already deep into diversity, equity and inclusion work and making changes to our staff and board that made us more reflective of our community. Equity has certainly been at the core of our Black Male Achievement initiative which has been led by new interim Chief of Police Yvette Gentry. And last year we introduced the Racial Wealth Gap Simulation and a new speaker series called "Beyond Buzzwords" with nationally renowned speakers and authors that has reached more than 1,000 people.
Well before protests sprung up across the country, we were a leading voice pushing for systemic change and ending racial inequalities and injustices through our public policy work.
So where does that leave us in September of 2020?
We know there was a great need in our community before coronavirus. The pandemic only exacerbated that need and now there is even more work to be done to ensure every person in our community achieves their fullest potential.
Here are a few staggering numbers:
There were 17,000 disconnected youth (homeless, foster care, criminal justice system, or not employed or in school) in our community in December 2019. That number is well over 32,000 today.
12,000 single-parent female heads of households with children were at immediate risk of homelessness pre-COVID.
Nearly 50% of students entering JCPS were are already behind before the pandemic and are at risk of falling further behind in a virtual environment, exacerbated by our community's digital divide.
Louisville ranked fifth in the country for concentrated poverty before COVID.
Effectively addressing these challenges requires expertise, innovation, cultural competence, collaboration, and a sense of urgency that Metro United Way is well-positioned for because of our deliberate evolution pre-COVID.
As the backbone of a movement of nearly 1,000 corporate partners, 35,000 individual donors (almost 10% of Louisville area households) and 100-plus nonprofits, in 2019 we challenged ourselves to look more strategically at our approach to empowering people, supporting families, and transforming the community in the areas of education, income, health, housing and racial equity.
As a result of that community-driven process, we moved away from our traditional funding model to a flexible RFP process that would enable us to fund breakthrough innovations and effective interventions to meet today's challenges.
In the midst of COVID-19 and the social justice issues that are top of mind across our community, this RFP-based process has allowed us to engage a wider variety of organizations with transformative ideas to receive funding while continuing to work with legacy partners on new ventures.
The next round of our RFP is now open and will focus on efforts to raise the educational success of students and increase the income and economic mobility of individuals.
The best news?
We have already begun to see the benefits of our new investment strategy. Merging our history of quantitative, programmatic problem solving with an investment strategy created to capitalize on innovative, transformative solutions, we have been making investments to address gaps that have been amplified by the COVID-19 crisis.
When you give, volunteer or advocate with Metro United Way, you're doing more than supporting a network of nonprofits. MUW makes connections that break the cycle of poverty, coordinates work among nonprofits, uses data to drive decision-making, and connects people to purpose across our community.
In a world where "unprecedented" and "new normal" are heard all too often, our objective is to emerge from today's struggles into tomorrow's successes and prosperity. It is my hope that we can create yet a new "new normal" that establishes a strong foundation for success across our community that includes everyone. And I'm encouraged that we will finish this unbelievable year strong.
It will take all of us working together to effectively, innovatively and equitably meet the long-standing and growing needs of our community.
Now more than ever, we need to be united.
Theresa Reno-Weber is president and CEO of Metro United Way.
Your Turn
Theresa Reno-Weber
Guest columnist
From, left, University of Louisville football players Cole Bentley, Adonis Boone, Caleb Chandler and Emmanual Sowders join a group of volunteers during a community cleanup through downtown Louisville in June. The group, a combination of the Jamon Brown Foundation and the Metro United Way, showed its support of the right to protest while advocating that it remain peaceful following the police shootings of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee.
$$$
