Mayor, we want answers about the deaths of Breonna Taylor, David McAtee
18 June 2020
Mayor Greg Fischer,
Louisvillians continue to protest against police injustice for Breonna Taylor and David McAtee. We will not go away. We demand justice. As mayor, you must speak courageously and honestly.
You are the "compassion" mayor. We call on your compassion in this critical moment to provide immediate and unequivocal answers to the following questions in order for Louisville and the nation to move forward.
Breonna Taylor 1. When will the police Public Integrity Unit's investigation into Breonna Taylor's death be finished? Will you release now the parts of the investigation where facts have been found and conclusions have been reached?
It has been more than three months since Breonna's death.
The Courier Journal reported on May 16 that you said the PIU's investigation would be finished the following week, but the full investigation has not been turned over to the attorney general's office or the FBI.
The Louisville Metro Police Department released video from the killing of David McAtee before the investigation of it is finished in order to vindicate LMPD officers who shot at YaYa without turning on their body cameras.
2. What are the specific LMPD policies or procedures and/or the agreement with Louisville FOP that you claim prevents you from quickly terminating a police officer for wrongdoing that results in the death of a person?
3. Have you apologized to Breonna Taylor's family on behalf of the city for her death at the hands of police who lied to obtain a warrant to search her apartment?
LMPD said the postmaster confirmed that packages were sent from the suspected drug trafficker to Breonna Taylor's apartment, but the postmaster stated there were no packages of interest going there.
What else do you know that they have lied about to obtain search warrants?
4. Will you apologize to Kenneth Walker on behalf of the city for his arrest by police and trauma from LMPD's illegal entry and shooting to death his girlfriend?
LMPD knew of the 911 recording that showed that Kenneth Walker did not know who had broken the door in when he fired his weapon, but he was charged with attempted murder of a police officer.
5. Will the city apologize to and compensate Breonna Taylor's neighbors who experienced property damage and psychological damage from having their neighbor wrongly killed in the middle of the night by police, their apartments shot up and their peace forever disturbed?
David McAtee 1. Whose decision was it to send LMPD and the Kentucky National Guard to 26th and Broadway on June 1 and on what basis?
2. How many LMPD officers were on site when David McAtee was shot, and how many of them had their body cameras turned on?
3. What is the specific LMPD provision that requires an officer to turn on her body camera, and which officers are required to comply?
4. Is there a reason an officer would not be terminated if she was required to activate her body camera when firing her weapon and did not do so?
5. Is there additional video footage of the scene/shootings from any source that you or LMPD are aware of that has not been released to the public?
Mayor Fischer, scripture warns us about crying "peace" when there is no peace. You can begin to bring peace to Louisville by telling us the whole truth. Justice demands it.
Joe Phelps is co-chair of EmpowerWest Louisville.
Your Turn
Joe Phelps
$$$
