'Freedom isn't free'
Eadens, Savannah
20 June 2020
Six young men carried the casket on their shoulders, the names visible from afar.
Breonna Taylor. George Floyd. David McAtee.
They walked in silence through the streets of downtown Louisville for almost nine minutes to represent the amount of time a police officer pressed his knee into Floyd's neck before killing him last month.
The group of about 100 students and other activists marched Friday in honor of Juneteenth and its place in America's history amid an ongoing fight for justice and equality after weeks of protests in Louisville and across the country.
Under Friday's humid sun in Jefferson Square Park, Ashanti O'Neal, a 22-year-old Louisville native, wrote dozens of names onto the black casket and filled the sides with lesser-known names — Deborah Danner, Kendra James, Yvonne McNeal. When young children approached her, O'Neal had to explain they are the names of victims of police brutality.
"My body was in rain, I was hot and uncomfortable, but this is nothing compared to what these people have gone through," O'Neal said. "And I need to bring light to the names that don't get spoken as often."
Around 5:45 p.m., after an evening of speakers and performances to celebrate Juneteenth, O'Neal joined a group of teens on a march to Roots 101 African American Museum in downtown Louisville.
The museum, the first of its kind, has plans to open on Museum Row as a "healing place," according to curator Lamont Collins.
"You have to understand where you came from and where you're going," Collins said to the group.
Fateemah Mohammad, an 18-year-old Moore High School graduate, said the solemn Juneteenth event "brings a reality to the need for justice. I feel like this is a way to come together to celebrate us. It's our time and we need all the support we can get. I know that change needs to start right now, and I have to initiate that change I will do it for the next generations."
That sentiment is something longtime civil rights activist and west Louisville resident Mattie Jones knows all too well.
"Freedom isn't free," she said in her unwavering voice during a panel discussion earlier Friday with Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer and other activists.
Fischer was joined Friday morning on the virtual call by Jones; Louisville Sen. Gerald Neal; Sydney Tucker, a member of One Love Louisville Youth Implementation Team; and Aukram Burton, executive director of the Kentucky Center for African American Heritage, to discuss the importance and history of Juneteenth, which celebrates the liberation of those who had been held as slaves in the United States.
Fischer also took the opportunity to announce an order making Juneteenth an official city holiday.
"Juneteenth is the oldest celebration of emancipation commemorating the unwavering strength, selfless courage and the contributions African Americans have made to American institutions, wealth, innovations, commerce and art," Fischer said.
The proclamation follows a statewide recognition made Thursday by Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear, who said he will encourage the General Assembly to adopt it as a state holiday in the next regular session.
Though Juneteenth commemorates the day in 1865 when Union Maj. Gen. Gordon Granger informed a reluctant community in Galveston, Texas, that President Abraham Lincoln had freed enslaved people in rebel states two and a half years earlier, enslaved people in Kentucky were not freed until the 13th Amendment was ratified later that year, in December 1865, the mayor said.
"And there was joyful pandemonium that day," Fischer said. "But still, the heartbreaking truth was that while they were legally free, most former slaves had no wealth, few resources and faced vicious and violent resistance to exercising their constitutional right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Unfortunately, that is still a heartbreaking challenge that we see too far too often here today."
The cries for a just society are echoing in protests in hundreds of American cities, Fischer added. "I think we're at a turning point as a country. ... White patriarchy built this system, and we have to dismantle it."
Neal, the first Black man elected to the Kentucky state Senate, shared his struggles with institutional racism.
"It's an uphill struggle," Neal said. "Racism is prevalent, even in the legislature. Some of it learned, some of it embraced by those who are conscious of what they're doing. I see this problem as a white problem, especially among those of goodwill who remain silent and do not act, and do not support actively.
"This is not just about Black folk struggling for freedom," Neal continued. "This is about our whole community. Our whole state. Our whole nation."
Neal expressed the need to organize a commission to study race in order to begin making policy to address issues of disparity in health, education and criminal justice in Kentucky. He also called for a discussion about reparations to "compensate and correct the inequities."
"We should also require periodic deescalation training and set guidelines to restrict use of force among police," Neal said, in addition to a statewide no-knock warrant ban and mandatory camera requirement among the police force. Breonna's Law, which bans no-knock warrants in Louisville, was passed by the Metro Council last week.
Tucker, the youngest speaker on the panel, said part of the issue is that U.S. history books are only teaching a snippet of African American history. Events like Juneteenth are left out entirely and many learn about racism in experiences outside of school, Tucker said.
"Racial stereotypes create a barrier and cut off the ability to have a connection with people," Tucker said.
Jones said there continues to be a disconnect between generations.
"I blame ourselves," she said. "We did not keep the freedom movement going. We got too comfortable and became complacent. And we did not fight to bring the history of our struggles into schools."
Beginning this upcoming school year, all fifth- and eighth-grade students in Jefferson County Public Schools will learn about Juneteenth along with their study of American independence. Juneteenth also features prominently in the curriculum for an elective class available to JCPS high schools called "Developing Black Historical Consciousness," a course that digs into Black history far beyond the civil rights movement.
In the 1960s, Jones said, the movement was able to unite and organize under a leader — Martin Luther King Jr. The younger generation hasn't had that luxury as they are still taking to the streets to call out injustice.
"We've come a long ways, and we still have a long way to go because racism will never die," Jones said. "We've got to keep on walking. We've got to be proud of the neighborhoods, and most of all, we got to be proud that we are Black people. We should not be ashamed to talk about the road that we came from.
"The job is in your hands now," Jones said, addressing the young people of the movement. "I already ran the race."
Savannah Eadens is a culture and diversity reporter for the Courier Journal. Reach Savannah at seadens@courierjournal.com, 502-381-9498 or on Twitter at @savannaheadens.
A group of protesters carries a coffin bearing the names of Black citizens killed by police during Juneteenth rally Friday.
Photos by Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Young men hang from a car while traveling on Jefferson Street on Juneteenth.
$$$
