KSP investigation into McAtee shooting 'substantially complete'
Ladd, Sarah
04 Aug 2020
The Kentucky State Police investigation into the shooting death of David McAtee is "substantially complete" and will be turned over to the Jefferson County Commonwealth's Attorney, officials announced Monday.
J. Michael Brown, executive cabinet secretary for Gov. Andy Beshear, said during the governor's Monday press conference in Frankfort that the case will also be shared with the FBI, which is also investigating the National Guard shooting of McAtee at his Louisville barbecue stand.
The McAtee file isn't closed, Brown said, adding there is "nothing to suggest" in the evidence that there is "significant difference" between what has been reported and shown in videos from the night McAtee was shot.
"This investigation been comprehensive and includes more than 170 interviews, KSP lab reports and information obtained from federal agencies," Brown said.
The file will stay open until the Jefferson County Commonwealth's Attorney finishes his review and for any potential follow up required.
"The community, all who are involved and all the families of all who were involved deserve the truth," Brown said.
McAtee, 53, who often fed police at YaYa's BBQ, was fatally shot by the Kentucky National Guard in the doorway to his West End business at about 12:15 a.m. on June 1.
Louisville Metro Police and the Guard were sent to disperse a crowd after curfew in the parking lot at 26th Street and Broadway next to YaYa's BBQ, where McAtee worked and lived. The curfew was in place because of protests — some marred by violence — over the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who died in her South End apartment.
Police and state officials say ballistic evidence and security cameras show McAtee fired at least two rounds from his 9 mm handgun that night and that two National Guard and two Louisville police officers fired at least 19 shots in response. One round hit McAtee in the chest, killing him.
The bullet was too damaged to determine which rifle fired the shot, officials said. The names of the two Guard members have not been released.
An attorney for McAtee's family, and witnesses there the night he died, say he would never fire at police. His niece had been hit in the doorway at least three times by projectiles that turned out to be pepper balls fired by police, attorney Steve Romines said.
Romines said police violated several department policies, including failing to use body cameras during the shooting that might have better revealed exactly what happened that night.
Brown said Monday the United States Attorney's Office formally requested that there be no more public release of information related to the investigation until the federal investigation is over, a request he plans to honor.
"The federal agencies have ensured us," Brown said, "that they will make this a matter of high priority and they are applying significant resources to their investigation."
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah.
West End business owner David McAtee was killed on June 1.
$$$
