Mayor Fischer is missing in action as Louisville struggles with race issues
03 June 2020
Since the first people began carrying signs and exhorting us to say Breonna Taylor's name last week, Louisville has wrestled with what has unfolded on our downtown streets.
We've seen protesting like we haven't seen in more than 50 years. We've watching rioting and looting on our downtown streets. We've seen the death of yet another black man at the hands of police.
What we haven't seen is leadership.
Where is Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer while all this is going on?
He showed up for a few minutes Monday morning to offer his condolences to Odessa Riley, the grieving mother of David McAtee, who died early Monday when police and National Guardsmen returned fire into a crowd at 26th and Broadway.
And then he left.
He'll appear on a livestream soon from a secured bunker somewhere and then he'll disappear.
He might even call a late-night press conference when those who most need to hear from him are not at a television or computer where they can watch.
They'll be out dodging his police department's pepper balls and tear gas canisters — and God forbid, more bullets — then.
In the five days since this all began, Fischer has been in hiding. Emerging only to spout a few platitudes and finally — years after he should have — fire his police chief.
He's been hunkered down and blaming the rioting and the protests on "outsiders" who have come to Louisville to raise hell and cause trouble.
To do that, however, misses the real issue.
We have a problem with race in this community.
We have for years.
Louisville's blacks and whites have had an uneasy truce that dates back to the civil rights battles of the 1960s. That truce is only occasionally broken when there's a court ruling or a police policy or the death of a black person that brings the rawness of our city's dirty little secret to the surface.
For Robert Hollis, a 52-year-old who spent two decades in the Army and has called Louisville home for 10 years, blaming the current unrest on outsiders is insulting.
"I look around and I know half of these people," Hollis said while standing at the corner of 26th and Broadway during a protest Monday afternoon near the spot where McAtee died.
Hollis was there trying to make sure things didn't get too heated, intervening once when a young man heaved a water bottle at police wearing riot gear, and another time when a protester became angry with a news reporter.
"What he's saying when he says it's 'outsiders' is that, 'My negroes are peaceable negroes. My negroes are subservient negroes. My negroes do what we tell them to do.'"
And in blaming "outsiders," Fischer is discounting all the things in Louisville — what he has repeatedly declared a compassionate city — that have led us to this point in history.
He's forgetting that Louisville banks long engaged in redlining — a practice that kept African Americans from buying homes. That Louisville has been and remains deeply segregated in its housing patterns — and white people complain about attempts to integrate their neighborhoods even today.
He's forgetting the riots and protests of those opposed to forced busing in the 1970s because white people didn't want their children taught in the same schools as black children. He forgets that we had to put police on school buses to make sure white adults didn't harm the black children who were simply trying to go to class.
He's forgetting the unrest in the 90s when there was a string of shootings involving police that left several black men dead, including one who was handcuffed when he was shot.
He's forgetting the systemic racism in the police department that led to young men of color being pulled over and yanked from their cars during routine traffic stops, being the subject of police searches and being handcuffed on the side of the road even though they have done nothing wrong.
None of those things fit with his boast that Louisville is a compassionate city.
Hollis said he believes the only things that will end the protests and the often-dangerous confrontations between the black community and the police are communication and leadership.
Two things there have been far too little of — not just now but going back decades.
Fischer has failed on both accounts.
You'd think after nearly 10 years in office, he'd have figured both those things out.
He is seen as helping to cover up what happened in the death of Taylor when police broke into her apartment with a no-knock warrant in the middle of the night. There was no acknowledgment the city had erred until nearly two months after she died, and police still haven't released their internal investigation of her death.
He hasn't stepped outside of his bunker — even during the peaceful daytime rallies — to talk to protesters. More importantly, he hasn't gone to listen to them.
His answer to protesters in this compassionate city has been to fill their lungs with chemical weapons rather than fill his own ears with their anger, their worries and their fears.
And when he issued a curfew order and then sent police and National Guardsmen to enforce it at a gathering at 26th and Broadway early Monday morning, he sent a message about what was important to him and this community.
"You protect things that can be replaced by killing black people who can't be replaced," Hollis said.
$$$
