She's training new activists in the art of protest
26 July 2020
"We're better in numbers. ... We're better united."
Talesha Wilson
The banner appears first, followed by dozens of protesters in black T-shirts.
On a white background in big, bold letters is the phrase "Fire! Fire! Gentrifier!"
It's carried by two men who hold it outstretched behind Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer, oblivious to the group's presence as he continues a July 10 news conference at a ribbon-cutting for a new apartment complex in the city's Portland neighborhood.
"When you think about what we're trying to do here in the city and what we're trying to do in the country, there's really nothing more fundamental than people having a stable, affordable home," Fischer says as the group begins to chant the words on the sign.
In the crowd is Talesha Wilson, a 27-year-old community organizer who trained the people behind the demonstration.
Wilson has been hosting regular training sessions around town since early June, after hundreds of people took to the city's streets, where they've spent more than 50 days demanding justice for Breonna Taylor.
She learned how to facilitate protests from local organizers who came before her, and now she's passing those skills on to new protesters with the goals of keeping them safe, pointing them to resources should they get arrested and teaching them how to demonstrate effectively.
And by all accounts, the action at Fischer's news conference was effective, she said.
"Everyone worked really hard," Wilson said. "... People felt good about it. People felt like their voices were amplified."
That's always been the point of protest, she said, to disrupt the lives of people in power and call their attention to people who have felt silenced.
"There should be no reason why Black people are not explaining what we want done in the West End," where the apartments are located, Wilson said.
"They're definitely going to try to gentrify as much as possible, and we're going to interrupt that as much as possible for as long as they are not inviting us to the table and allowing us to be part of that conversation."
Wilson, a graduate of Central High School, said she's almost always been an activist. But she grew into her community organizer role during her time at the University of Louisville.
That's when she started Diversity at the Table, a series of dinners at which guests discussed issues around race, gender, class and sexuality.
She's continued those events while working a full-time corporate job, leading direct action trainings and joining the board of Change Today, Change Tomorrow, a nonprofit that provides support and resources for marginalized communities.
The work can be exhausting, Wilson said, but she gets support from other Black women leaders — such as Chanelle Helm, Hannah Drake and Keturah Herron — who push her to keep going.
"We definitely are leaning on each other in so many different ways," Wilson said. "... We're making sure that we continue to be intertwined with each other."
Wilson said it would be selfish of her not to share the knowledge she's gained from those women and other activists, which is why she started the direct action trainings.
"I felt like what good would it do everyone else if I only have this information," she said.
"We're better in numbers. We're better collectively. We're better united. And that means if I know something, then share it with someone else.
"The biggest goal is not just to get everyone free but to also make sure that people are safe and are effective, because we don't want this momentum to die down."
Reach reporter Bailey
Loosemore at bloosemore@
courier-journal.com, 502-582-
4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore.
Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-
journal.com/baileyl.
"We're better in numbers. ... We're better united."
Talesha Wilson
Talesha Wilson is a Black, queer artist and activist who is at the forefront of the Black Lives Matter movement in Louisville.
$$$
