Protesters to continue after grand jury decision
Kenning, Chris
26 Sep 2020
Activists insist the system failed to bring any justice in Breonna Taylor's death during a botched drug raid and are pushing for new statewide police reform laws and for more consequences for the officers.
Demonstrators in Louisville took to the streets Friday for the third night since a grand jury declined to indict three police officers for the death of Breonna Taylor, with one organizer vowing to "make these streets hot" until all the officers were fired.
At the downtown park where protesters have gathered nightly since May 28, crowds chanted "No Justice, no peace," as anger continued to boil over Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's Wednesday grand jury announcement, which sparked demonstrations in cities across the country.
"We will make sure that this city as uncomfortable as it can be," Tamika Mallory, of the group Until Freedom, said Friday, later leading marchers holding a purple banner reading "Justice for Breonna Taylor."
Among several hundred marching was Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, who earlier told The Courier Journal she was "mad, pissed, upset, hurt" over the decision.
Tension grew overnight after Louisville police arrested two high-profile Black advocates, state Rep. Attica Scott and Shameka Parrish-Wright, on rioting and other charges for damage to a library their attorney said they had nothing to do with.
Since the grand jury decision, at least 150 people have been arrested and two police officers shot and injured. Mayor Greg Fischer has extended the city's 9 p.m. curfew through the weekend, though critics have said it's not evenly enforced.
"You can just feel the dread over the city," said Darian Ferguson, who was at the park as part of a group of therapists offering free counseling. He said crisis calls had increased amid the turmoil and grand jury's decision that hit some "like a truck."
Cameron said Wednesday the two Louisville Metro Police officers who fired their weapons at Taylor were justified in using force to protect themselves after they faced gunfire from her boyfriend, who has said he didn't know who was at the door.
The only charges were three counts of wanton endangerment against former Detective Brett Hankison for shooting into an adjacent apartment.
But activists insist the system failed to bring any justice in Taylor's death during a botched drug raid and are pushing for new statewide police reform laws and for more consequences for the officers.
Earlier Friday, the University of Louisville basketball team led a justice march. Coach Chris Mack and players David Johnson, Charles Minlend and Malik Williams started the hourlong event with speeches to sign-carrying supporters. The collective group made a 45-minute trek to Throws Field and back while chanting "Breonna Taylor" and "No justice, no peace."
At the downtown park Friday, people sang, watered flowers in the memorial area and played piano. Some provided food and water. Adria Johnson was encouraging people to register to vote.
That echoed calls by Taylor's family attorney Benjamin Crump, who earlier had urged people to vote and highlighted get-out-the-vote marches in several cities on Oct. 14.
"We've got to take all of the frustration, the heartache, the outrage and channel that into tangible action," Johnson said.
Along downtown streets as evening fell, where nearly 25 square blocks were still barricaded from traffic amid a state of emergency, several hundred marchers raised fists as cars honked in support.
They walked past police barriers including into the NuLu neighborhood just east of downtown, where protesters earlier this year had demanded that restaurants and businesses hire more Black employees and take other measures. The group stopped to demonstrate at a Cuban restaurant whose owner previously criticized "mafia tactics."
"Our community is hurting," Fischer said in a news conference Friday, saying peaceful protest was welcome but that arrests would result from violence or property damage.
By 6:55 p.m., police had declared the march unlawful. Flash-bang explosions went off. For Louisville, the night would likely another long one.
Courier Journal reporters Hayes Gardner and Bailey Loosemore as well as Indianapolis Star reporters Lawrence Andrea and Binghui Huang contributed. Chris Kenning is a statewide enterprise writer. Reach him at ckenning@gannett.com, 502-396-3361 or follow on Twitter at @chris_kenning.
Activists insist the system failed to bring any justice in Breonna Taylor's death during a botched drug raid and are pushing for new statewide police reform laws and for more consequences for the officers.
Protesters squeeze between a barricade as they march from Jefferson Square to the NuLu district in Louisville on Friday. Since the grand jury decision Wednesday, at least 150 people have been arrested.
$$$
