National Guard bullet killed David McAtee
Kachmar, Kala
10 June 2020
The bullet that killed David McAtee in the doorway of his West End barbecue business June 1 was fired by a Kentucky National Guard member, state officials said Tuesday.
McAtee was killed by a single gunshot wound to the chest with green-tipped, military-grade ammunition used by guard members — known as 5.56 mm M855 bullet, according to J. Michael Brown, secretary of the state's Executive Cabinet and a former district court judge.
Newly released evidence indicates that McAtee fired first, shooting twice "in the direction" of police officers, Brown said.
In response, two guard members fired rounds that night, along with two Louisville police officers. But bullet fragments recovered from McAtee's body were so damaged they couldn't be matched to an individual rifle, Brown said.
"This is very conclusive of a critical part of our investigation," he said.
Louisville police previously said they believe McAtee fired first, based on security footage at the scene. But neither Brown nor police say they know McAtee's intended target — or if he had one.
Steve Romines, the attorney for McAtee's family, said Tuesday that loved ones are convinced the barbecue stand owner wasn't aiming at anyone.
Kentucky State Police investigating the case didn't find bullets fired from McAtee's gun. Romines said that's likely because the bullets were fired into the air "to gain some sort of calm in this crazy situation."
Romines said it's "absurd" that the government is "unleashing your own soldiers on your citizens with weapons of war." He said the authorities' conclusion "smears" McAtee.
But Brown said the evidence makes it clear that McAtee fired first, and he said police and guard members are trained to fire in response.
"He was clearly firing in (the officers') direction outside the door," Brown said. Returning fire at McAtee would have been "part of their engagement" and "what any law enforcement officer would do," Brown said.
Ballistic reports show that a 9 mm Jimenez handgun McAtee dropped in the doorway after he was hit by gunfire had been fired at least twice that night, Brown said. Casings from two bullets fired from the weapon were recovered near the door.
Guard members fired roughly 10 rounds in response, with police firing another nine.
While four bullet fragments found in McAtee's body were badly mangled, remaining green paint on at least one fragment indicates the shot came from a member of the guard.
They were carrying M4 rifles that night, Brown said. LMPD officers who fired that night used a 9 mm Glock 19 and a .40-caliber Glock 22.
Beloved barbecue stand owner McAtee, 53, was known in the Russell neighborhood for YaYa's BBQ shack near 26th Street and Broadway.
He was killed June 1 when Louisville Metro Police and Kentucky National Guard troops were sent to clear the parking lot of Dino's Food Mart, which is across the street from the shack, after reports of a crowd there after curfew.
A 9 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. curfew had been in effect during protests that erupted after LMPD officers shot Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed black woman killed during the execution of a no-knock search warrant.
State Police are working with the FBI in Louisville to investigate the shooting and also are overseeing LMPD's public integrity investigation.
Brown said little about pepper balls fired by a police officer to clear the crowd. Asked about Louisville police firing pepper balls, Brown said, "I don't know, really, about the actions of LMPD other than what I've seen in some of the videos you've seen."
But he noted that firing pepper balls, which McAtee's family and friends say started the shootout, doesn't sound anything like gunfire.
Romines on Tuesday said officials did exactly what he said they would at a press conference Monday: Deny responsibility.
"LMPD started the whole situation by violating multiple policies and firing (pepper balls) continuously," Romines said. "They want to ignore that."
Moreover, at 26th Street and Broadway, there was no protesting happening that night, Romines said.
"Why is (McAtee) all of a sudden thinking the cops are going to break things up like that? Like they didn't have more important things to do that night?"
What the video shows Video from Dino's Food Mart across the street from YaYa's that Brown showed during the public release of ballistics information on Tuesday show two National Guard members behind LMPD Officer Katie Crews — who also fired her weapon that night — during the shootout.
The Kentucky National Guard hasn't released the names of the two uniformed members who fired that night, but Gov. Andy Beshear said he expects the organization to release a statement soon.
KSP and the FBI are working together to review all 29 videos they've obtained in the investigation, frame by frame, Brown said. There are typically 24 frames per second in film.
The FBI is also working on a video, which includes audio from other body cameras that might have been on but blocked when officers took cover, that will link audio and video from various sources to re-create what happened.
Brown said there's no timeline for either.
"There is still significant evidence remaining to be gathered, and there are still going to be questions as we continue," Beshear said. "There may be some questions that we can never answer."
Jamie McAtee and sister Addie McAtee stand together as they remember and honor their brother, David McAtee, during a candlelight vigil June 2 near 26th and Broadway in the West End.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
A pedestrian walks past a mural of David McAtee by artist Damon Thompson on plywood outside the Limbo Tiki Bar. McAtee was killed during a confrontation near his business on June 1.
$$$
