Yarmuth's challenger speaks at event for 'Take Back Louisville'
Tobin, Ben
13 Sep 2020
Rhonda Palazzo, the Republican nominee to challenge Democratic U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth, spoke about bringing "unity" to Louisville Saturday afternoon during the first event hosted by "Take Back Louisville," a right-leaning group that started on Facebook.
Speaking before a group of roughly 30 people outside of Evangel World Prayer Center off 6900 Billtown Road, Palazzo, a Louisville real estate agent, said she wants to help "take back Louisville for God, for righteousness and for law and order."
"Having the position as a representative from this community will give me the opportunity to work with different groups and bring unity," Palazzo said. "United we stand, divided we fall. I want to bring unity to Louisville."
Following months of largely peaceful protests in Louisville over the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman shot and killed in her apartment by police during a narcotics raid on March 13, Brent Parker started the "Take Back Louisville" Facebook group in August, and it has more than 25,000 members today.
Parker said the group has since migrated to the website takebacklouisville.com.
Parker, a Louisville native who now lives in Clearwater, Florida, but who led Saturday's event, said the group's "vision" is centered on peace, prosperity and patriotism.
"Peace is our foundation," Parker said. "If we don't have a peaceful community, there's no way to prosper."
Parker said business owners in Louisville have been hurting from a lack of peace from both "anarchy from the racism" and "COVID overreach."
Speakers at the rally spoke against the Black Lives Matter movement and government-backed coronavirus safety measures meant to stem the spread of the virus. Parker also said the group is not racist, denounces all racism and will not allow white supremacists into it.
In response to the rally and Palazzo's comments, Yarmuth campaign manager Heather Dearing said the Kentucky congressman is "focused on making the federal investments we need to get this pandemic under control and our economy up and running again."
Yarmuth is also focused on "finally taking concrete steps to address the institutional racism that has plagued our nation for far too long," Dearing said.
Other speakers at the rally included conservative political activist Frank Simon as well as members of the crowd.
Parker said the group will continue to have prayer events in the coming weeks.
$$$
