Maker chooses Howard over UK
Hale, Jon
04 July 2020
LEXINGTON — Few expected five-star forward Makur Maker to attend college. Even fewer expected him to do so at Howard University.
Maker committed to Howard, a historically Black university, Friday morning over Kentucky, UCLA and Memphis.
"I was the 1st to announce my visit to Howard & other started to dream 'what if,"" Maker tweeted. "I need to make the HBCU movement real so that others will follow. I hope I inspire guys like Mikey Williams to join me on this journey. I am committing to Howard U & coach Kenny Blakeney."
Maker had listed Howard, which has not reached the NCAA Tournament since 1992, as a contender for his commitment throughout his recruiting process and taken a visit to the school, but most pundits had projected Maker would start a professional career instead of attending college.
That option remains on the table as Maker has entered his name in the NBA draft as a graduate of a fifth-year prep school.
Maker is not projected as an NBA draft pick though, and his guardian has said in multiple interviews Maker will attend college if he does not receive the feedback from NBA teams he wants to hear.
Kentucky was never considered the favorite for Maker's commitment but had reportedly remained in contact with his camp in recent weeks.
The Wildcats' 2020-21 roster appears finished, but John Calipari is still awaiting word on the status of a waiver for Wake Forest transfer Olivier Sarr to play next season. If Sarr's waiver is denied, Kentucky would not have a true center on the roster and might need to make another addition.
The 6-foot-11 Maker, ranked as the No. 4 center in the 2020 class by the 247Sports Composite, could have filled that roll.
Instead if he does follow through on the commitment, Maker will forge a path that has been mentioned by multiple five-star prospects in the last year.
Williams, the MaxPreps Freshman of the Year and a member of the 2023 class, recently speculated he might choose an HBCU as protests about racial injustice spread across the country in the wake of the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery.
"This didn't just recently pop up in my head," Williams wrote on Instagram. "What a lot of coaches don't understand is that we don't need them. WE CONTROL OUR OWN NARRATIVE!! I'm very thankful that God blessed me to be in the position to do that. We write our own stories. We determine what the next page in life is going to be. Why does it always have to be the big universities? Why does it always have to be the big names? Have you ever thought about helping your own people out?
"WE ARE THE REASON THAT THESE SCHOOLS HAVE SUCH BIG NAMES AND SUCH GOOD HISTORY. But in the end what do we get out of it?? What a lot of Top level athletes don't understand is. If you're a pro..than you're a pro no matter what college you go to..even if you don't go to college."
Howard, which was 4-29 last season and ranked 350th of 353 teams in the country by advanced metrics website KenPom.com, also hosted five-star guard Josh Christopher on a visit last fall before he committed to Arizona State.
In a recent interview with ESPN, Howard coach Kenny Blakeney, who played college basketball at Duke, cautioned that top prospects must be aware that attending an HBCU would mean forgoing the bells and whistles that come at basketball powers.
"Wherever a five-star lands, we can't mess it up," Blakeney said. "If we mess it up, we may not have another opportunity to be able to do it."
$$$
