We should have listened to Colin Kaepernick and others
29 Aug 2020
The other day, National Football League Commissioner Roger Goodell said he wished he had listened to Colin Kaepernick sooner.
Kaepernick, you remember, was the San Francisco 49ers quarterback who in 2016 brought new currency to the Black Lives Matter movement when he started kneeling during the national anthem before games to bring attention to racism in the way the nation polices its Black citizens.
He was dismissed as un-American by some. He was told he was insulting the military and he was run out of the league. President Donald Trump called one of Kaepernick's teammates who knelt beside him a "son of a bitch."
Too bad we all didn't listen to Kaepernick then. Too bad we didn't listen to a lot of people over the past 50 years.
If we did, we might not have the daily protests that we're seeing in downtown Louisville and Portland, Oregon, and now in Kenosha, Wisconsin. We might not have the vandalism that has accompanied some of the protests.
We might not have two dead and one injured in Kenosha because a 17-year-old kid with an assault rifle allegedly wanted to play soldier as people took to the streets to protest another incident in which a police officer shot a Black man in the back.
The problem is, we don't deal with race well in the country. We never did.
As a nation, we have a history of appeasing those who want us to look away. And as a city, we have the same history of not wanting to admit that racism exists.
We respond to gaping wounds with Band-Aids. And then we move on.
In Kentucky's U.S. Senate race, we have a Democratic candidate who has said far too little about the protests and what led to them.
And we've got a Republican who is more than happy to lie about the Democrat and is using video from riots in other parts of the country to stoke fear of Black people and dismiss those in the Black Lives Matter movement as nothing but lawless criminals.
Neither is trying to fix the problem. One is pretending it doesn't exist. The other is exploiting it by fearmongering. And so it goes.
History shows, when it comes to race, we Americans treat the symptom by whatever means we can, but we leave the underlying illness there to fester and to grow.
More than 50 years ago, after race riots rocked New Jersey and in Detroit, President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed a commission to study the riots and what caused them and what we could do to make sure they didn't happen again.
The Kerner Commission, as it would come to be known, recommended a series of changes — often expensive changes — to provide better education, jobs and housing to African Americans. The Kerner Commission report came out just a few months before the 1968 election. Johnson mothballed it, and Richard Nixon never acted on it after he was elected president.
We had riots and marches in Louisville in the 1960s, and we wound up with some state and local civil rights legislation but nothing that changed the course of race relations here.
And the protests stopped.
In the 1970s we had forced busing in an effort to end "separate but equal" in the Louisville and Jefferson County school systems, which remained segregated two decades after the decision in Brown v. Board of Education.
That, too, came with its own form of racial unrest — mainly from the white people who were marching, rioting, burning things and hurling rocks at buses full of elementary school students. And again, the protests stopped before we ever really solved anything.
Starting in the 1990s, we had several high-profile cases in Louisville with deaths of Black men at the hands of police and corrections officers — the highest-profile of which was Desmond Rudolph, an unarmed 18-year-old shot by police as he tried to flee in a stolen car.
That shooting spurred protests, and then spurred them again a year later when then-Chief Gene Sherrard honored the two officers involved in the shooting — who said they feared they were going to be run over —for "exceptional" valor.
Then-Mayor Dave Armstrong fired Sherrard. The protests stopped.
Then, in a 21/2-year span beginning in June 2000, Louisville police shot and killed six men. Five of them were Black, including one man who was handcuffed when he lunged at a police officer with a box-cutter type knife. The officer opened fire, striking him 11 times.
The problem is more complex than just blaming "racist cops." While any organization the size of Louisville Metro Police is almost certain to have some racists, the problem goes well beyond that.
It involves department policies that played a huge role in Breonna Taylor's death in March. It involves training, and it involves fear at a time when guns are everywhere and police have to assume everyone is armed.
It involves protocols that allowed for police to pull over people driving in largely Black parts of town and search their cars for drugs and guns, even with scant reason to believe either existed.
And it involves some warped way of thinking that because the strategy targeted Black parts of the community rather than Black drivers, it was not racist to the core.
And it involves police officers who are returned to the street after serious violations because their contracts protect them.
And, as the Kerner report pointed out, it involves the lack of education, good jobs and housing — all problems we have failed to adequately address in Louisville and our nation.
And had the people who matter — the policy makers who could effect change — been listening to the Black Lives Matter protesters after Michael Brown was killed in Ferguson, Missouri, in 2014, or after Kaepernick began sounding the alarm in 2016, maybe we could have changed the way we police the Black community before Breonna Taylor was killed by police in her apartment.
The spate of incidents around the country in which police have killed unarmed African Americans — people like George Floyd and Taylor — has led to often peaceful but sometimes violent protests around the country. And why wouldn't some of them turn violent, when we attack someone involved in peaceful protests, call him un-American or a "son of a bitch," and tell him his protest has nothing to do with police brutality but is really about disrespecting the flag and military veterans.
Martin Luther King Jr. once said, "A riot is the language of the unheard."
If only more people had listened.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
$$$
