Is stronger oversight of LMPD coming?
Costello, Darcy
11 July 2020
After years of unanswered calls for stronger civilian oversight of Louisville Metro Police, a city work group commissioned by the mayor is growing closer to proposing legislation for a "hybrid" oversight mechanism.
The group, which discussed a draft ordinance Friday, has called for a board or commission of community members with subpoena power.
And the group's members hope it will be charged with investigating police misconduct and complaints, along with reviewing internal investigations and the department's policies and training.
In the wake of the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor and the widespread protests that followed, Mayor Greg Fischer said in May he supports granting the body subpoena power, though that would require a change in state law.
The draft ordinance, obtained by The Courier Journal, creates an inspector general position to serve as "staff" to a board made up of civilian volunteers. That individual would conduct complaint investigations initiated by the board and could also do audits of the department.
(The Metro Council has already set aside funding for a civilian oversight mechanism, which could be sent toward the creation of a new office of inspector general.)
Some questions during Friday's meeting focused on how the group would work with LMPD's existing Public Integrity Unit, which investigates Metro Government employees to determine if crimes were committed.
"Is it our intention to create just a shadow agency that contains civilians, in order to make the public feel like there are, you know, they can trust the investigations? Because that's what it feels like now," said Sadiqa Reynolds, CEO of the Louisville Urban League.
Councilman Bill Hollander, D-9th, the architect of some of the language creating an inspector general, responded that that office could in theory have the power to look at particular incidents, but also at patterns and practices.
The inspector general could, for instance, look into how the Public Integrity Unit operates and why it takes so long for it to complete cases, Hollander said.
After Friday's meeting, the group hopes to have another meeting July 24 to discuss further changes to the draft ordinance, before it is assigned to a Metro Council committee by Aug. 7.
That could mean it goes before the Metro Council for a full vote on Aug. 20 or Sept. 3.
The legislation, prepared by the Jefferson County Attorney's Office, lays out that the inspector general should have law enforcement experience but no affiliation with LMPD and should be appointed by the mayor and approved by the Metro Council.
It adds that "to the extent permissible by law," employees of Metro Government should cooperate with the office and provide "unrestricted access to employees, documents, records and other information" — but states that the office should not publicly disclose information considered "confidential in nature."
Under the draft ordinance's language, the inspector general could investigate:
Serious injury or death of someone in police custody
Serious injury or death due to police action
Abuse of police authority
Excessive use of force
Discrimination
Sexual misconduct
The civilian review board could mandate an investigation, or the inspector general could initiate his or her own investigations.
And, should the General Assembly change state law, the draft ordinance calls for the inspector general to have the power to issue subpoenas, administer oaths and compel testimony.
The draft ordinance comes out of discussion sessions the work group has held since its creation in May. It could be changed based on comments from the work group and the public before it reaches the Metro Council.
The three oversight models the work group examined were:
Auditor/monitor-focused: examine "broad patterns" in complaint investigations and conduct systemic reviews of policy, practices or training, along with making recommendations for improvement.
Review-focused: review completed internal police investigations and can make recommendations or request additional investigation.
Investigation-focused: conduct independent investigations of complaints through collection of evidence and witness interviews, before issuing findings or recommendations on alleged misconduct.
A summary report prepared by the work group states the consensus reached by the group was for a "multifaceted hybrid model" to incorporate aspects of all three.
The report notes that areas of "additional discussion" include: the need for statutory changes in order to grant subpoena power, the role of an inspector general, the makeup of board members and if the body would eliminate the existing internal affairs investigation process within LMPD.
Louisville's long history of calls for independent oversight Last spring, amid outcry over Louisville Metro Police's traffic-stop practices in high-crime neighborhoods, some Metro Council members said they wanted to strengthen independent oversight of the police department.
Some, including Hollander, hoped to see an office of inspector general. Others talked about beefing up the powers of the existing Citizens Commission on Police Accountability.
"The time is now to keep pushing the pendulum of change, to keep changing policy and putting meat on what the citizens have the ability to review," Councilwoman Jessica Green, D-1st, said at the time.
That was far from the first time the public sought stronger oversight powers.
The Kentucky Center for Investigative Reporting found a pattern of calls that stretched back two decades — after the police killing of Desmond Rudolph in 1999, the killing of James Taylor in 2003, and in 2020, following the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
A lawsuit from the Fraternal Order of Police — led at the time by now-Council President David James, D-6th — quashed a push to grant a new civilian oversight board subpoena powers in the early 2000s and the board never went into effect.
After James Taylor's death, another group was promised, but that body, the Citizens Commission on Police Accountability, has been derided as toothless and unable to force change or properly investigate cases for years since its creation in 2003.
In 2017, The Courier Journal found in its 14-year history, it had reviewed more than 70 cases but made recommendations in only five.
Ricky Jones, who chairs the University of Louisville's Pan-African Studies Department and is a Courier Journal contributing columnist, said Friday that the citizens commission could be "eradicated tomorrow, and we would lose nothing."
"It serves no real function. It was, in effect, designed to be a toothless tiger, just to be a placeholder, so that people would think that Louisville has citizens' review. Currently, we do not," Jones said.
In 2018, Kerry Harvey, the former U.S. attorney charged with investigating Metro Government's handling of the Explorer sex abuse scandal, raised red flags about the police department's investigative practices.
At a July 2018 Metro Council hearing, Harvey suggested internal investigators should have term limits and be required to disclose what relationship they have with the subjects of investigations. He also proposed that criminal review of officers be conducted by a legal authority.
Harvey didn't delve into civilian oversight in his report, but he said in the hearing that having LMPD officers investigating fellow officers will always open the department to criticism.
And, on the topic of inspector generals, Harvey said he thought installing one in Louisville would be "worthy of consideration."
"Inspector generals perform a very valuable purpose," Harvey said.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support journalism by subscribing : courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Protesters shout at the police presence at Jefferson Square Park on June 27. Louisville is working on new oversight for LMPD.
$$$
