Beyoncé wants police involved in Taylor's death charged
Ladd, Sarah
15 June 2020
"Your office has both the power and the responsibility to bring justice to Breonna Taylor, and demonstrate the value of a Black woman's life."
Beyoncé
In letter to Kentucky Attorney General
Daniel Cameron
In a Sunday letter, Beyoncé urged Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron to charge the Louisville police officers involved in Breonna Taylor's death and thus "demonstrate the value of a Black woman's life."
Using the motif of three months passed, the music superstar wrote that the investigation into the shooting that has prompted weeks of protests in the city has "created more questions than answers" and that the time passed has resulted in no justice or peace for the family.
The next three months, she wrote, "cannot look like the last three."
Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician, was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro police fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a no-knock search warrant as a part of a narcotics investigation.
Court records show that police obtained a warrant with a no-knock provision for Taylor's apartment signed by Circuit Judge Mary Shaw. Even so, officials have said that plainclothes officers knocked and announced their presence before breaking in Taylor's door with a battering ram.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who was also in the apartment, fired one shot in response, hitting Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove returned fire, striking Taylor at least eight times.
She died in her hallway.
Walker has said he thought intruders were breaking in. He and neighbors have said they never heard police announce themselves before entering, according to his attorney and lawyers for Taylor's family.
"While 'Breonna's Law' passed in Louisville and federal legislation has been introduced that will also ban no-knock warrants," Beyoncé wrote, referring to Louisville's new law that prohibits no-knock warrants and Sen. Rand Paul's efforts to ban them nationwide, "these small steps in the right direction are painful reminders that there has still been no justice for Breonna Taylor or her family."
"Your office has both the power and the responsibility to bring justice to Breonna Taylor," she wrote to Cameron, "and demonstrate the value of a Black woman's life. I urge you to use that power."
The singer, whose full name is Beyoncé Knowles-Carter, asked that Cameron's office not only bring criminal charges against Mattingly, Hankison and Cosgrove but to "commit to transparency in the investigation and prosecution of these officers' criminal conduct" and to investigate "LMPD's response to Breonna Taylor's murder, as well as the pervasive practices that result in the repeated deaths of unarmed Black citizens."
"Don't let this case fall into the pattern of no action after a terrible tragedy," she wrote. "With every death of a Black person at the hands of the police, there are two real tragedies: the death itself, and the inaction and delays that follow it. This is your chance to end that pattern."
Elizabeth Kuhn, a Cameron spokeswoman, said his office is aware of the letter but, "As the letter makes requests related to the ongoing investigation involving the death of Ms. Breonna Taylor, we have no further comment."
In early June, the singer took to social media to wish her a happy birthday and demand justice. Other celebrities have used their platforms to share petitions, offer financial support and words of support, including Kanye West, Zendaya, Lupita Nyong'o, Matt Damon and more.
Read Beyoncé's full letter at beyonce.com/ image/letter-to-attorney-general-daniel-cameron/.
Underneath the letter are two links to petitions calling for, among other things, the officers involved to be fired. One is a #JusticeForBre petition and the other goes to a website, standwithbre.com, which has information about Taylor and another petition,
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah.Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"Your office has both the power and the responsibility to bring justice to Breonna Taylor, and demonstrate the value of a Black woman's life."
Beyoncé
In letter to Kentucky Attorney General
Daniel Cameron
$$$
