Black LMPD officer who knew McAtee wants 'to be the change'
Yates, Dominique; Cash, Rana L
06 June 2020
Christian Lewis joined the Louisville Metro Police Department eight months ago with a goal to serve and protect residents of the city that raised him.
Motivated by the 2016 killing of Philando Castile by a police officer during a traffic stop in St. Anthony, Minnesota, Lewis changed the course of his career path. A Ballard High School graduate and double major at Western Kentucky University with degrees in exercise science and gerontology, Lewis set aside his seven years of study to instead pursue law enforcement.
"I was touched by deaths as a result of police brutality," 27-year-old Lewis said. "The Philando Castile case had me feeling some type of way."
Still months shy of his one-year anniversary with LMPD, Lewis is now face to face with two high-profile incidents in Louisville — the fatal shootings of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee by law enforcement officers. McAtee's death on Monday was especially hard on Lewis, who grew up in western Louisville and had known McAtee, owner of YaYa's BBQ, most of his life.
"Today, I had my breaking point. When I found out an OG lost his life early this morning," Lewis wrote on his personal Facebook page. "Mr. D was from my childhood, and someone who watched over me through out the years. Mr. D always looked out for me, fed me and always loved that I became a Black Officer of change."
The weeklong protests of the Taylor incident followed by McAtee have only fortified Lewis' decision to become a police officer, he said.
"It makes me want to be a cop even more, to be the change and usher in a new era of policing," Lewis told The Courier Journal on Wednesday.
Using his personal Facebook page, he wrote a lengthy post about the turbulent times and his position specifically as a black officer. The post has since generated nearly 5,000 likes, 4,100 shares, and 1,000 comments.
"It was a risk, but I felt like I should do something that was well-written and would have the right type of message," Lewis said. "I could take the punishment for whatever would come."
Lewis said he has heard from countless black and white officers, as well as people in the military, who have been supportive of his message.
Lewis agreed to allow The Courier Journal to publish the Facebook message he posted on Monday.
"I can't even lie man, this past week has been tough for me and heavy on my heart. I've been in a tough place, being a Black Officer in these crazy times. Today, I had my breaking point. When I found out an OG lost his life early this morning. Mr. D was from my childhood, and someone who watched over me through out the years. Mr. D always looked out for me, fed me and always loved that I became a Black Officer of change. I know I can say that all Black Officers are in a tough spot right now. We're damned if we speak up too much on social media, or damned for not enough.
I grew up in the West end, and when I applied, I made it clear that I had all intentions to work where I came from; and to make sure my community was safe. I have tried to stay off of social media because it's a lot to process.
To all those that say slick-ish comments about Black Officers not policing our own, nothing negative happens when I'm on scene. The area I work in, when police pull up-all the neighbors have their cameras out and I would have been viral by now [trust], if we acted out of line. My daily goal is to make sure all parties go home safely. I appreciate all the kind words, from my family and friends that have noticed that I have been carrying this heavy responsibility."
Rana L. Cash is the sports director for The Courier Journal. Contact her at rcash@gannett.com or on Twitter: @rana_cash. 
LMPD Officer Christian Lewis was emotional while helping control the crime scene where David McAtee — owner of YaYa's BBQ, whom Lewis had known most of his life — was shot and killed by law enforcement.
$$$
