Metro Council members address proposal
Costello, Darcy; Austin, Emma
18 Aug 2020
Louisville Metro Council Republicans filed a resolution Monday calling for a no-confidence vote in Mayor Greg Fischer and asking him to resign.
Fischer has dismissed the resolution as "the kind of partisan and divisive political games that have paralyzed Washington, D.C.," adding that it's "sad and shameful" of Republicans to bring them to Louisville.
With all seven Republicans signed onto the legislation as co-sponsors, all eyes moving forward are on Metro Council Democrats — putting some in a politically precarious position, should the legislation be called for a vote in a committee next week. (It's not clear yet which committee will hear it.)
We asked Metro Council members what they thought of the call for a no-confidence vote and how they plan to vote.
Here's what some had to say, lightly edited for clarity:
Councilwoman Donna Purvis Purvis said she had not fully gathered her thoughts on the resolution or "come to a conclusion."
"We've had much discussion throughout these past few weeks, with regard to what we should have known so far, with regard to the investigation of these cases," said Purvis, D-5th District.
"I can honestly say that we are not happy with not being able to get the information that we need, moving forward, to start the healing process in the community."
Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith Sexton Smith, D-4th, called the no-confidence proposal "a colossal waste of time," arguing that the Metro Council had better things to worry about.
"We have some very serious issues in our community, such as LMPD reform, racial issues, the global pandemic (and) the housing crisis," she said. "This is a distraction. And the last thing the community wants or needs is a political sideshow."
Council President David James James, D-6th, said Monday after the Republicans' press conference that there's frustration with the mayor's handling of "certain situations on both sides."
But, he said, he hadn't decided "whether to support this."
"I would tell you that there is frustration with the level of transparency that the mayor has provided through all sorts of different things within our community," James said.
"I am personally frustrated, and currently, with the mayor's lack of transparency and suing the council for trying to get the truth to the community."
Asked if he agreed with Fischer's characterization of the resolution as a political game, James said he thought council members were "doing what their constituents are asking them and begging them to do."
Councilman Bill Hollander Hollander, D-9th, said the resolution is "the last thing" Louisville needs.
"Council Republicans are taking a page from President Trump's playbook and distracting us with a political sideshow.
"I have questions — I was the first member of Metro Council to call for an investigation. I think we need to get answers, but removing the mayor is not going to solve these problems. We need to keep the focus on systemic and long-lasting reform of LMPD."
Councilman Pat Mulvihill Mulvihill, D-10th, said the process in place requires "a pretty high level of standards" to warrant a no-confidence vote. Unless there is evidence of willful neglect or criminal action, Mulvihill said he couldn't and does not support a vote of no confidence in the mayor.
"Who's prepared to deal with the pandemic and at the same time deal with civil unrest? I don't think anybody has a playbook," Mulvihill said. "We all have to step up. We all have to try to do better."
Councilman Kevin Kramer Kramer, R-11th, is one of the co-sponsors of the resolution calling for a no-confidence vote in Fischer, which he said Monday was the council's only option.
"We believe that this community is struggling with a deep mistrust of what has transpired and what we are doing in response," Kramer said. "After exhausting every avenue, with the mayor's decision to actually sue the Metro Council, we found ourselves with no other option."
Councilman Mark Fox Fox, D-13th, said he wasn't surprised by the call for a vote but said it's too early for him to pick a side.
"I believe there are a lot of things that could have and should have been handled better in recent weeks, and that's kind of the feedback I've been getting. ... The take I'm getting from folks I represent is that the crime and lawlessness should not be allowed to occur."
Councilman Markus Winkler Winkler, D-17th, pointed to earlier discussions when the Government Oversight and Audit Committee initiated its investigation into Fischer's role in the Breonna Taylor case, David McAtee's death and the response to ongoing protests for racial justice.
"The commentary by many Republicans at that time was that we were going to let the facts shake out, see what they are and then make a decision," Winkler said.
"I'm more interested in conducting and concluding our investigation, then making a decision on wrongdoing, based on the facts."
He added that he would much rather the council focus on working together, rather than "advancing our own political objectives and putting personal political ambitions above the needs of the city."
Councilman Anthony Piagentini Piagentini, R-19th, said that up until now, Metro Council Republicans had been "holding off" asking for Fischer's resignation because they hoped to see a "full investigatory process play out through" the committee investigation.
"It is clear to me that waiting for that process to play out, the mayor will drag it out until he is no longer in office," Piagentini said. "I firmly believe that this city can wait no longer to begin the process of healing."
Councilman Robin Engel Engel, R-22nd, said the legislation is an "opportunity" for constituents to weigh in on the discussion.
"In our discussion in committee, we're going to work with our Democratic colleagues and we're going to ask them: 'Will you vote for this, or are you going to defend the actions of this mayor and how he's handled this?'" Engel said. "I suspect ... that at the end of the day, this will be a nonpartisan vote, hopefully, and not just ours."
Councilman James Peden Peden, R-23rd, said that Metro Council members have "tried to go the nonpartisan route," but that Fischer had decided to stymie that process.
"We tried to go the nonpartisan, 'be open, be transparent, just tell us what's going on.' He's the one who went as far as to sue us to put a stop to that," Peden said. "This is what he has forced us into. This is not the avenue we wanted to go."
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
$$$
