City breaks homicide record
Kobin, Billy
20 Sep 2020
2020 has surpassed Louisville's previous record for yearly homicides, after four men were shot and killed in two separate incidents late Friday and early Saturday, according to police.
The victims included the nephew of David McAtee, a West End barbecue chef whom a Kentucky National Guard members fatally shot in June during one of the first nights of protests over the death of Breonna Taylor.
The first shooting was reported just before 11:30 p.m. Friday in the 7800 block of Beulah Church Road, where Seventh Division officers found three victims, Louisville Metro Police spokeswoman Alicia Smiley said.
The three men had "sustained varying gunshot wounds," and two of them were pronounced dead at the scene, Smiley said.
The third victim was rushed to University of Louisville Hospital, where he was pronounced dead, Smiley added.
The Jefferson County Coroner's Office later identified the victims as Steven Matthew Head, 24; Toreon Jermaine Hudson, 26; and William Scott Smallwood, 48, all of Louisville.
Police did not provide additional details about what led to the shooting, which reportedly occurred outside Bungalow Joe's Bar and Restaurant.
The owner of the restaurant, Joe Bishop, created a GoFundMe to raise money for funeral expenses and support the families of the victims. Bishop wrote on the GoFundMe page that a "lone, deranged gunman indiscriminately shot and killed 3 customers" at his restaurant.
One of the victims was the fiancé of the restaurant's manager, and all three victims knew each other from work, according to Bishop.
Kloey Thompson said she was friends with Head and that he was "a very loving, caring and selfless person."
"He was always there when you needed him," Thompson told The Courier Journal. "He was one of the goofiest people and always knew how to brighten up my day."
A Louisville man was arrested in connection with the shooting on Beulah Church Road, according to police.
Michael E. Rhynes Jr., 33, was charged with three counts of murder, according to online court records, which indicated he was being held in Louisville Metro Corrections on a $2 million bond ahead of a Monday arraignment hearing.
Later at about 1:15 a.m. Saturday, Second Division officers responded to a reported shooting in the 2600 block of West Broadway, where they found two men suffering from gunshot wounds, Smiley said.
One of the men was pronounced dead at the scene, and the second victim was taken to University of Louisville Hospital with what appeared to be non-life-threatening injuries, Smiley said.
The victim who died at the scene by 26th Street and Broadway was identified by family as Marvin McAtee, whose uncle, David, was shot and killed June 1 by a Kentucky National Guard member while standing in the doorway of his barbecue business that is on the northeast corner of 26th and Broadway.
Witnesses and friends at the scene Saturday afternoon said Marvin was found shot on the sidewalk by Dino's Food Mart, which is across the street from YaYa's BBQ, where Marvin had worked more after David's death.
"He was a very fun, happy guy to be around," Marvin's cousin, Urana Carr, told The Courier Journal Saturday. "He hasn't had the perfect life, but he was on the right path."
"He even followed (in) his uncle David's footsteps by giving out food at times, just to give back to the community," Carr said. "(It's) just a very sad day for us."
Anyone with information is asked to contact the anonymous crime tip hotline at 502-574-LMPD (5673).
The four deaths overnight brought this year's criminal homicide count to 121, according to a Courier Journal review of LMPD data.
Louisville's previous record for murders was reported in 2016, when LMPD investigated 117 homicides.
"This is a tragic milestone," Mayor Greg Fischer said in a statement. "We have lost far too many people to this senseless violence, and I grieve with those directly impacted – the mothers, fathers, sons and daughters of those killed – and those indirectly impacted – the community as a whole, which also has suffered great loss."
$$$
