Push to defund police sparks mixed reactions in Louisville
Loosemore, Bailey
15 June 2020
"People have gotten used to the cycle of protest and anger and hashtags, and what do we get to show for it? Maybe a few small reforms."
Robert LeVertis Bell
A candidate for Louisville Metro Council District 4
Amid protests against police violence in Louisville and across the nation, one proposed solution has quickly picked up steam.
"Defund the police."
It's an idea that sounds drastic but is simple at its core. Instead of continuing to increase funding for law enforcement, proponents say, elected officials should divert some money from police budgets toward education, housing, workforce development and other social services that help reduce crime rates by pulling people out of poverty.
In the wake of several high-profile deaths of Black people at the hands of law enforcement, including Louisville residents Breonna Taylor and David McAtee, the calls for government leaders to consider such a shift are growing – and some major cities are moving in that direction.
In Louisville, however, while some current and former city employees support redistributing some tax dollars budgeted for police, Mayor Greg Fischer said he does not "believe the community wants to defund the police, and that's not our plan."
In fact, Fischer said the department – which received nearly $190 million from city, state and federal funds in the fiscal budget that ends June 30 – needs more resources either directly or indirectly so that it can provide social services that address "all of the conditions that plague folks in low-income communities."
One former city employee disagreed.
"There's a hypocrisy in this in that we've continued to make deep investments in policing, despite a rising homicide rate. But we've cut promising programs for reasons that I deeply disagree with," said Rashaad Abdur-Rahman, who recently left his position as director of Louisville's Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods.
The police department's funding has grown 24% over the past 10 budget cycles, and it now accounts for 22% of the city's total appropriations, which was nearly $850 million in fiscal year 2019-20.
As the Metro Council continues to discuss the next city budget, proponents of defunding the police say now is the time to begin reassessing how the community prioritizes its limited tax dollars.
"I think we're at a point in time where people are looking for actual solutions," said Robert LeVertis Bell, a candidate for Louisville Metro Council District 4. "People have gotten used to the cycle of protest and anger and hashtags, and what do we get to show for it? Maybe a few small reforms."
Reece Chenault, a community organizer, said that "the reason why people feel like they need the police is because we don't have so many other things. We don't have good social services. We don't have good public school systems. We don't have good health care systems. We don't have an economic structure that provides for everyone."
If the city were to divest in police, Chenault said, "I think it's clear where we'd spend the money. ... It's a question of are we willing to let go of racism enough?"
Where is Louisville's money going? In New York and Los Angeles, mayors Bill deBlasio and Eric Garcetti have already pledged to divert funding from the cities' police departments to community services.
And in Minneapolis, where former Officer Derek Chauvin has been charged with murder in the death of George Floyd, council members have said they will "begin the process of ending the Minneapolis Police Department."
In Louisville, the Metro Council is still working to approve a budget for fiscal year 2020-21, which begins July 1. Councilman Bill Hollander, who chairs the council's budget committee, said several members have received calls from people who want to talk about the role law enforcement plays in Louisville, and those are "conversations everyone should be having, including police."
But Hollander declined to say whether the committee has considered cutting money for the police department.
When adding the police, department of corrections, emergency medical services and the fire department, traditional public safety accounted for about 42% of the appropriations.
Meanwhile, social services such as the library system, the public health department and parks and recreation accounted for about 15%.
In April, Fischer released his proposed 2020-21 budget, which includes increasing the police department's budget by less than 1%, though the number of filled positions within the department has dropped by more than 100 employees since the previous budget cycle.
Ryan Nichols, president of the River City Fraternal Order of Police, said that decline in employees has put a strain on officers, who are already underpaid.
Instead of cutting the department's budget to fund other services, Nichols said the city should increase wages and benefits to attract the best officers to its force.
Hollander said the Louisville Metro Police Department's budget has grown in recent years out of a necessity to cover the city's increased pension responsibilities.
And the council has tried to put money toward social issues, including investing $1 million in services for homeless residents last year, he said.
Fischer has proposed continuing funding for those services in the 2020-21 budget, as well as spending $1.5 million to support young adults who are "disconnected" from society.
Louisville employees call for change For Abdur-Rahman and others, a city's budget is more than just lines of numbers – it's a moral document that indicates what elected leaders value and prioritize.
In Louisville, officials are showing through their budget that they support a failing law enforcement system, he said.
"Cities across the country are spending millions of dollars on police and incarceration," Abdur-Rahman said. "But Black and brown communities are not seeing the benefits of those investments at best and, at worst, are falling victim" to them.
Abdur-Rahman said Louisville has an opportunity to think differently about its values and how they're acted on in the budget.
But that will require a strong will to act from elected officials, he said.
"We need brave leaders. We need leadership that is going to allow a new program to grow," Abdur-Rahman said.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, however, tweeted June 8 that calls to "defund or disband the police are extremely dangerous & reckless."
"We face incredible public safety challenges throughout the Commonwealth that can only be solved when law enforcement and our communities work together," he said.
T Gonzales, director of the Center for Health Equity, within the city's health department, doesn't disagree.
The community needs to be involved in any potential systemic changes, he said. But Louisville does need to revise its budget if it wants to truly address public health issues that often lead to crime – such as substance abuse and mental health disorders.
Louisville's protests have shown that residents don't feel like they've had adequate opportunities to affect change in their governments, Gonzales said.
Officials could change that, he said, by instituting a participatory budgeting process.
"I think whenever there's an opportunity for more of our residents to have a say in how (budgeting) happens, providing opportunities to be authentically engaged with that, I think we can get closer to a Louisville that's working for more people, a Louisville that's safer and healthier for more people," Gonzales said.
Police asked to do too much Yvette Gentry said she doesn't think any officer would argue against giving up funding if it also meant reducing some of the responsibilities that are shouldered by police.
During her 25 years with the Louisville Metro Police Department, including serving as deputy chief, Gentry said she saw officers routinely put in situations that they weren't adequately trained for, from deescalating mental health crises to responding to drug overdoses.
And that, in turn, leads people with medical and mental health issues to be overexposed to law enforcement, she said.
Gentry, who is Black and who now works as a project director at Metro United Way, said completely defunding a police force is unrealistic. But communities also can't keep expecting officers to be first responders to every call.
Other agencies need to step up and take on some of the work, she said.
"Everyone needs to say, 'How do we become the first call instead of law enforcement in these situations?' " she said.
Fischer on Wednesday said he agrees that officers are being asked to do too much.
But instead of shifting resources outside the department, he said the city needs to make sure "resources are available to LMPD or embedded within LMPD so people feel like whatever challenges that they have to deal with are being addressed effectively by the city."
Gentry, however, said policy changes and training alone are not enough to prevent future "egregious, terrible things" that have happened at the hands of law enforcement, including the death of Floyd in Minneapolis.
"We have an issue with racism and morality with police officers that feel like they have so much power, they're so invincible that they can put a knee on a man's neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds," Gentry said. "There's no policy that can get you out of that."
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/baileyl.
"People have gotten used to the cycle of protest and anger and hashtags, and what do we get to show for it? Maybe a few small reforms."
Robert LeVertis Bell
A candidate for Louisville Metro Council District 4
A protester sits in the middle of Jefferson Street facing a line of Louisville Metro police officers on May 28. Mayor Greg Fischer said he does not "believe the community wants to defund the police."
$$$
