McConnell, AG haven't talked Taylor case
Watkins, Morgan
25 Aug 2020
GEORGETOWN – Attorney General Daniel Cameron has not discussed his office's high-profile Breonna Taylor investigation with his mentor and former boss, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, the longtime senator said Monday.
When asked if he has offered Cameron any advice on that case or if Cameron has reached out to him about it, McConnell said: "Well, we've not discussed it, but I have a great deal of confidence in the attorney general.
"And apparently it's taking longer than a lot of people expected, and I can understand the impatience," he said, in reference to the mounting public pressure the attorney general faces to finish the investigation and release his findings.
"But that's not, it seems to me, a rationale for some of the things that seem to be occurring in Louisville in connection with it," said McConnell, who was speaking Monday morning during a public appearance at the hemp-centric company Ecofibre's new operation in Georgetown.
McConnell has been critical of certain tactics, such as looting and damaging property, that some people have used during ongoing protests against racism and police brutality in Louisville and cities around the country.
In Louisville, the past few months of protests have been predominantly peaceful, although there have been some instances of people engaging in vandalism, looting and property damage.
A central focus of the protests in Louisville is the March 2020 death of Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician, who was with her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, on March 13 when officers forcibly entered her home under the authority of a no-knock search warrant.
Walker, who said he didn't know it was the police who were breaking in, fired a shot that struck one officer in the leg. The police returned fire, killing Taylor.
Cameron is under pressure, both nationally and in his home state, to criminally charge the three Louisville police officers who were involved.
McConnell indicated Monday that he trusts Cameron's ability to make that decision.
"I have great confidence in the attorney general to go where the facts follow, where the facts lead him, and to bring charges at whatever point they think they've made the case," he said.
McConnell also said he thinks it's appropriate for Cameron to take the time to make a speech during this week's Republican National Convention.
"Of course," he said. "I'm doing the same thing."
McConnell also spoke up Monday in support of police departments, as protesters in his home state and around the nation demand reforms that would change the way officers are allowed to use force (lethal and otherwise) and would greatly reduce the amount of public money law enforcement agencies receive.
"I have a lot of patience for peaceful protesting — a constitutionally protected activity. No patience whatsoever and no tolerance whatsoever for rioting, looting and violence," McConnell said. "And I think it is completely inappropriate to demonize all police departments because most of the police across America are trying to protect us all.
"They're engaged in an extraordinarily difficult job, and this 'defund the police' movement, this anti-police movement, I think is way off the mark and does not certainly reflect my view of how to handle the situation," he continued.
McConnell said he feels the "rioting" in places like Portland, Oregon, and Chicago is "simply out of control."
"I think most Americans are smart enough to draw a distinction between peaceful protesting on the one hand and vandalism, looting and violence on the other," he said. "And for myself, I have limited tolerance of that ..."
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Protesters gather in front of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's house in the Highlands for a morning march on June 19.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
McConnell
Cameron
$$$
