Breonna Taylor's mother reacts to AG Cameron's speech at RNC
Watkins, Morgan
27 Aug 2020
"Whether you are the family of Breonna Taylor or David Dorn, these are the ideals that will heal our nation's wounds."
Daniel Cameron, Kentucky attorney general
Breonna Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, said it was nice to see Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron mention her daughter at the Republican National Convention on Tuesday evening.
And she hopes "the next time we see him he's telling the country he's charging all officers responsible for my daughter's death ..."
Cameron is in the midst of a high-profile investigation into the death of Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who was shot and killed by Louisville police officers in March.
"Even as anarchists mindlessly tear up American cities while attacking police and innocent bystanders, we Republicans do recognize those who work in good faith towards peace, justice and equality," Cameron said Tuesday at the RNC. "Whether you are the family of Breonna Taylor or David Dorn, these are the ideals that will heal our nation's wounds.
"Republicans will never turn a blind eye to unjust acts, but neither will we accept an all-out assault on Western civilization," he continued.
Dorn was a retired member of law enforcement who died earlier this year amid protests in St. Louis. His widow said he was attempting to protect a friend's pawn shop from looters when he was killed.
The power to bring criminal charges against the officers involved in Taylor's death, at the state level, rests with Cameron. And he's under a ton of public pressure to do just that.
Palmer said in a written statement Wednesday that she hopes he'll decide to do so.
"It was nice to see him using a national platform to remind those watching the Republican convention of my daughter's name," Palmer said of Cameron. "I hope the next time we see him he's telling the country he's charging all officers responsible for my daughter's death and is committed to getting her overdue justice."
Cameron is a rising Republican star in Kentucky, where he became the state's first Black attorney general after being elected in November 2019, and he has a close relationship with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, whom he used to work for.
The Taylor case has put him in the national spotlight, and so did his speech at the RNC.
On Tuesday night, he echoed McConnell's disapproval of the instances of vandalism and violence that have been seen during recent protests against racism and police brutality across the U.S. — something the longtime senator has decried in recent campaign ads as he runs for reelection.
Countless people have peacefully participated in those nationwide protests, many of which have featured individuals publicly demanding justice for Taylor in Kentucky.
Cameron also used his platform during the RNC to slam the Democratic presidential nominee, former Vice President Joe Biden, for race-related comments he has made in the past.
"I think often about my ancestors who struggled for freedom. And as I think of those giants and their broad shoulders, I also think about Joe Biden, who says: If you aren't voting for me, 'you ain't Black,'" Cameron said Tuesday, referencing a comment Biden made during a May interview.
Specifically, Biden said then: "If you have a problem figuring out whether you're for me or Trump, then you ain't Black." He soon apologized for making that comment.
Cameron also alluded to a couple of other instances in which Biden made similarly controversial statements, including an apparent reference to this one the former vice president made recently: "Unlike the African American community, with notable exceptions, the Latino community is an incredibly diverse community with incredibly diverse attitudes about different things."
Biden later said he didn't mean to "suggest the African American community is a monolith ..."
Cameron harshly criticized Biden for such comments Tuesday night.
"Mr. Vice President, look at me: I am Black. We are not all the same, sir," he said at the RNC. "My mind is my own. And you can't tell me how to vote because of the color of my skin."
Cameron painted a dire picture of what he thinks Biden would do if he wins the White House this fall.
"Joe Biden is a backwards thinker in a world that is craving forward-looking leadership. There's no wisdom in his record or plan, just a trail of discredited ideas and offensive statements," he said Tuesday night. "Joe Biden would destroy jobs, raise our taxes and throw away the lives of countless unborn children."
President Donald Trump, whom Biden hopes to beat in the November election, has widely and credibly been accused of racism over things he has done and said before and during his tenure as president.
But he has Cameron's support, which the attorney general made clear at the convention Tuesday when he offered a resounding endorsement of Trump.
"Let me close with something my mom told me: This country's many faces comprise a family, not separate parts to be divided against each other," Cameron said. "And though we fuss and fight, we are not enemies. We are Americans, united by a collective faith in our Constitution and laws, and the fundamental fairness they represent.
"We are defenders of life and of individual liberty. That's my Republican Party — the party of Lincoln, that believes America is an indispensable nation, an evergreen tree standing tall in a turbulent world.
"And that's why I am voting for Donald Trump for president," Cameron concluded.
"Whether you are the family of Breonna Taylor or David Dorn, these are the ideals that will heal our nation's wounds."
Daniel Cameron, Kentucky attorney general
$$$
