LMPD: Man arrested after firing gun at protest park
Kobin, Billy
19 July 2020
At the beginning of the video, a man wearing a white shirt, white shoes and dark-colored shorts and what appears to be a bandana around his neck is seen walking into a crosswalk at the edge of Jefferson Square Park. He then pulls out a gun and fires one shot into the air as over a dozen people are in the vicinity.
Louisville police say they arrested a man after he fired a gun at the edge of Jefferson Square Park following a fight Friday night.
But some bystanders who were downtown at the time have expressed concerns that officers arrested the wrong person.
"Just after 8 p.m., following a fight with someone in Jefferson Square a man fired a gun at the edge of the park, which was busy with people," Louisville Metro Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said in a statement. "Shortly after, LMPD officers came into the park to arrest the 24-year-old for (first-degree) wanton endangerment."
LMPD did not release the name of the man arrested.
However, a Courier Journal review of court records and an arrest citation shows Frederick D. Potter, 24, of Louisville, was taken into custody about 8 p.m. Friday on Fifth Street and charged with first-degree wanton endangerment.
No injuries were reported in connection with the incident.
Several protesters who were in the park at the time of the gunfire said it came following an altercation between people who were not involved in the demonstrations.
Jefferson Square Park, which has served as the hub for nightly protests over the death of Breonna Taylor, is bordered by Fifth, Sixth, Jefferson and Liberty streets in downtown Louisville.
According to Potter's arrest citation, LMPD's Real Time Crime Center cameras captured Potter "retrieve a handgun from a vehicle and fire a weapon into the air."
"Immediately after, someone else took the firearm from the (subject)," the citation says, adding that Potter's actions "placed everyone in the area in extreme danger" or at risk of "serious injury or death."
LMPD provided a roughly four-minute video of the incident that was captured by the Real Time Crime Center cameras and "edited for length."
At the beginning of the video, a man wearing a white shirt, white shoes and dark-colored shorts and what appears to be a bandana around his neck is seen walking into a crosswalk at the edge of Jefferson Square Park. He then pulls out a gun and fires one shot into the air as over a dozen people are in the vicinity.
The video then jumps forward and does not capture another person taking the gun from the subject.
Officers are seen arresting a man in the park as several bystanders look on, with some holding phones as they appear to record video of the incident.
The man who police detain is shirtless at this point, but he is wearing dark-colored shorts, a bandana around his neck and white shoes that appear to match what the person seen on camera firing a shot into the air was wearing.
Two officers then begin to walk with the detained man out the park and east down Jefferson Street, as numerous protesters follow behind and other officers ensure that no one attempts to disrupt the arrest.
The police then stop at the intersection of Jefferson and Fifth streets, cross to the north side of Jefferson Street and then walk the man west back toward Sixth Street.
A crowd continues to follow the officers, the video cuts forward, showing multiple LMPD patrol cars and black police vehicles slowly crossing Sixth Street and continuing west down Jefferson Street.
In his mugshot, Potter is wearing a gray tank top.
Following the man's arrest, which was "without incident," Halladay said "police were followed out of the park" by several protesters.
The protesters "followed, yelling and threaten(ing) officers as they tried to get a patrol car to secure the prisoner," Halladay said. "Officers continued to move to avoid the crowd, but were pursued for several minutes. More officers had to respond to assist as members of the crowd behaved in a threatening manner toward officers."
At one point, the video shows a person throw a drink at a police vehicle, while other bystanders move close to and yell at the windows of the vehicles.
Several protesters who were in Jefferson Square Park at the time of Friday's incident said Saturday that a second person fired a gun before leaving the park in a vehicle.
They expressed concerns that police detained the wrong person in connection with the gunfire, pointing out that several officers on the roof of a nearby building observed the altercation that led to the gunfire.
An LMPD spokesperson did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment on whether any other people were wanted in connection with Friday's altercation.
Potter entered a not guilty plea to his wanton endangerment charge during a Saturday morning arraignment, according to court records. He was appointed a public defender, and his bond was set at $5,000.
Jefferson Square Park, where protests have largely remained peaceful over the past few weeks, was marred by violence in late June, when police say a homeless man fatally shot 27-year-old Tyler Gerth.
Following that shooting, LMPD cleared the park of protesters and the tents that had sprung up in recent weeks.
Protesters have continued to gather each day and night in the park, which features a memorial to Taylor, though overnight camping has been prohibited.
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
At the beginning of the video, a man wearing a white shirt, white shoes and dark-colored shorts and what appears to be a bandana around his neck is seen walking into a crosswalk at the edge of Jefferson Square Park. He then pulls out a gun and fires one shot into the air as over a dozen people are in the vicinity.
This video, distributed by Louisville Metro Police Department, shows a man firing a shot at the edge of Jefferon Square Park, and then protesters confronting police. No one was injured.
LMPD
$$$
