Gov. Beshear is just fine after 'symbolic' lynching
Jones, Ricky L.
29 May 2020
White supremacists are openly and notoriously flexing their muscles again with the recent symbolic lynching of Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear from a tree at the state Capitol in Frankfort as part of a supposed Second Amendment protest. You might ask how the act of stringing up a white governor relates to white supremacy? Let me explain.
Attached to the Beshear dummy was the scrawl, "sic semper tyrannis" (Translation: thus always to tyrants). With that doff of the cap to John Wilkes Booth, who spoke the same words after assassinating the "race-traitor" Abraham Lincoln in 1865, the protesters once again bared their racist fangs. This makes sense for a group of "patriots" who often show up to such rallies with protest signs, guns AND Confederate flags as they "fight against tyranny" across the country.
Speaking of lynching, a stone's throw away in Louisville a few days earlier, Commonwealth's Attorney Thomas Wine held one of the strangest press conferences in recent memory in the latest chapter of the Breonna Taylor/Kenneth Walker saga. Wine attempted Jedi (or Sith Lord) mind tricks as he nauseatingly bowed and weaved to justify charging Walker with the attempted murder of a police officer. Then, magically, with neither apology nor explanation, he dismissed the charges with a retreat so deeply buried in rationalizations that it was almost lost.
With that, Kenneth Walker avoided another legal lynching suffered by so many black men.
Some black folk actually foolishly thanked Wine for dismissing the charges. Such fawning gratitude is misguided for the charges were not dropped because of beneficence or mercy. Indeed, in the aftermath of Breonna Taylor's killing, the anti-black machinery of control clanked into motion with its familiar playbook on multiple fronts. You know it well.
One, believe police, not the injured or dead citizens. Attempted. Two, make every effort to overcharge, over-punish and ruin the black suspect. Done. Three, to support the dominant narrative, have media cast doubt upon and demonize the deceased. Covered. Louisville's local NBC affiliate, WAVE 3, played that role.
Four, disregard, dismiss or threaten blacks who push back. Check. Years ago, Louisville Judge Olu Stevens fought valiantly to diversify juries. He was skewered and suspended. In this case, he lowered Kenneth Walker's bond and granted home incarceration. Stevens was attacked once again.
Metro Councilwoman Jessica Green publicly opined that Walker behaved heroically in trying to defend the woman he loved from unknown intruders. She was condemned by the Fraternal Order or Police, called a "cop-killer" and received threats. This time, however, as black people and their true allies grow increasingly tired of this treatment, Green did not stand alone. Many in the community and a number of Metro Council colleagues rallied to her side.
Fifth and finally, if all else fails – recalibrate and wait until next time.
In this anomalous round, the normal narrative was disturbed. The standard case protocols, diversions and aspersions that usually justify black death and destruction were simply too weak and wrongheaded to survive once they were dragged into the light of day and people fought back. Be clear, Breonna Taylor's death would have been ignored or justified and she would have been reduced to yet another hashtag if not for intervention. Kenneth Walker would have been left to rot in jail had their case not gained national traction. Unfortunately, most such situations remain cloaked in darkness with no attention at all.
Surely, Beshear is unfazed by his symbolic lynching in the midst of this madness.
If Beshear knows his history, he knows he's in great shape because, unlike so many others, he's still alive and powerful. His Kentucky constituents symbolically lynched him in the same month Demark Vesey was actually hanged in 1822, the Confederate Congress proclaimed black Union soldiers should be enslaved or executed in 1863, Ida B. Wells resolved to leave Memphis after rampant lynchings in 1892, and "brave first responders" attacked black children with water hoses and dogs in Alabama in 1963.
All things considered, Beshear has it good. He also knows the messages mobs are sending when they hang things from trees. They are parts of longstanding American white supremacist gangsterism cloaked in justice, freedom and opposition to tyranny rhetoric.
Let's just be glad it was only a pitiful rag doll whose neck was stretched from the end of a rope this time. The history of darker people actually being lynched socially, professionally, legally and physically in and beyond Kentucky is long, bloody and ongoing.
You doubt that? The FBI is now investigating yet another unarmed black man dying after a citizen's video shows George Floyd crying and begging for relief as a Minnesota police officer pins him to the ground with his knee crushing the doomed man's neck. The requested mercy was not granted.
Next hashtag, please . . .
A longer version of this column can be read at www.courier-journal.com.
Ricky L. Jones is a professor and political philosopher with degrees from Morehouse College and the University of Kentucky. He is also the host of iHeart Media's award-winning "Ricky Jones Show." His column appears bi-weekly in the Courier-Journal. Visit him at rickyljones.com.
$$$
