IU alum, LMPD officer is now marching in streets
Blau, Jon
14 June 2020
For years and years, Isaac Sowells lived a life where people were happy to see him.
He was the big man with a big heart. As a star offensive lineman at Indiana, he was one of a group of Hoosiers sent to Rogers Elementary School to talk to kids about the word "effort," connecting to the next generation with his story of success — with a big smile and a big laugh.
Just a natural socializer and do-gooder, Sowells' dream as a kid was to grow up and become an FBI agent. The next best thing, after he fell out of the NFL, was to become a police officer in his hometown of Louisville.
"It's amazing, college football, the pros, everyone loves you," Sowells said. "It's very different, you know, going into a profession where people in the community, they see a lot of injustice. Whether it's their personal experience or what they see on social media, it's a different dynamic."
On the streets of Louisville, the 6-4, 300-pounder will never go unnoticed. But the people who remember him from his childhood, his high school football days, they love him. They understand he's there to help. The people who don't, they have sometimes been suspicious just because he wears a badge.
Those feelings of distrust have been amplified in recent weeks with the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis and Breonna Taylor in Louisville, and many others in recent years. Protests broke out across the country, and Tuesday was Sowells' first day off in three weeks, because he's been on the street, doing his job.
But he hasn't just been present to maintain order. Sowells has been pictured arm-in-arm with protesters, walking up the street. Again, he loves these people. He hates injustice, like most cops.
"I'm also a Black man. If I take this police uniform off, I'm a Black man," Sowells said. "I understand there's racism that goes on in this country. I'm not blind to that."
This is a job Sowells wanted for a reason. He believed in his abilities as a communicator, de-escalating situations rather than using his massive frame to apply force. He believes in making an effort for the community that raised him.
First, that was on patrol. The last four years, he's been with the city's community policing unit, working during class periods in Louisville's elementary and middle schools. Sowells provides the area's at-risk youth with a male role model and roundtables to talk about issues in their lives.
"We talk about various subjects. Home life, gang violence, how to overcome things like that. Peer pressure ... social media," Sowells said. "I'm 38. We didn't have those types of distractions just yet growing up."
Sowells had his share of adversity as a kid, though. He lived with a single mother, and there were times she struggled to keep the electricity on and put food on the table. But she always stressed education, and that's what allowed him to find his way to IU and play college football.
The affable big man blossomed into a fourth-round pick of the Cleveland Browns in 2006. He just didn't have the best of luck in the NFL. As a rookie, he badly sprained an ankle during an intrasquad scrimmage and missed the entire preseason. Already down the depth chart, Sowells then had a concussion in Year 2 and missed time.
"The offensive line, playing that position, what you need is continuity," Sowells said. "If you're injured, there's no way you can be a part of it."
Browns coach Romeo Crennel was replaced by Eric Mangini going into Year 3. Sowells ended up in Detroit, where a knee injury essentially put the kibosh on his football career.
His ligaments weren't torn. They just weren't firing.
"It was one of the weirdest, freak injuries," Sowells said. "You've got power. You can squat 600 pounds. But you go on a single-leg press machine and you can't lift a pound."
He certainly couldn't push 300-pound defensive linemen out of the way anymore. But unlike many former NFL athletes, Sowells didn't have to sit with a feeling of no purpose. He already had an idea of what he wanted to do.
Within months of rehabbing his knee, Sowells was in the police academy. To his surprise, he found another former Louisville and NFL offensive lineman, Jason Hilliard, in the academy class before his.
"We were about to start, they were about to finish. I'm the biggest guy in my class. He was the biggest guy in his class," Sowells said. "We meshed that way."
They didn't talk about football all that much. Both married men with children, they tended to talk about family. As officers, they were of a similar mind, as well.
They wanted to be seen as gentle giants, like they were walking the campuses of their respective universities.
"If I went on a traffic stop, and I'm 6-4 and over 300 pounds, they would be like 'Oh my goodness, what's about to happen?'" Sowells said. "But we both went to big college campuses. Indiana is diverse, so is UL. We felt like that was one of the keys to being a police officer — communication and being able to de-escalate situations."
There were still close calls on patrol, things Sowells would rather not tell his wife about. But he was able to accept the fact that he was putting his life on the line every day he left for work. That's just part of the job.
Sowells also embraced being a role model. He's done that in the community policing unit, in the schools. But he's also been back on the football field as an offensive line coach at Central High School, helping win a state title in 2018.
He would head over to the field right after his shift ended, arriving in his cop car. Sometimes, Sowells was wearing his police uniform on the practice field.
There were never any comments. No snide remarks.
"They knew me," Sowells said. "Even though I was a police officer, they knew Isaac Sowells the man."
Sowells was the guy who proudly stood with them in the locker room, holding the state title trophy with his right hand and holding up one finger with his left. His state title ring is a cherished possession. It's his only title win ever.
His players also know Sowells the family man, because he would sometimes bring his son, Isaac Jr., nicknamed Spike, to practices. Spike is now an eighth-grader, already measuring 5-9, 220 pounds. He wears a size 15 shoe.
Sowells has since stepped away from coaching, wanting to spend more time with his family. Friends and family have been texting Sowells in recent weeks, just checking in, because they know the man. They know he's human, and they know times like these can be hard.
He can't bring himself to watch the video of Floyd's death.
"It's sad and very disturbing when you see things like that," Sowells said. "As an officer, as a Black man, too, it breaks your heart when you see those things."
He wants to see change, like the protesters, and Sowells admits it would be a good thing for more people that look like him to work in policing. But that's a personal choice. It's not just as easy as hiring people. Those people need to be willing to put their lives on the line to do the job.
Ultimately, it's just about an uncomfortable conversation, which goes both ways. Both the police and the people they serve will have to be at the table.
"You have to create a dialogue. What can we do to do better as a country?" Sowells said. "That's not going to be easy. You are developing a rapport and a dialogue. Once you can get both parties to do that, this country will be better off."
Isaac Sowells, fourth from right, walks arm-in-arm with others during a protest march for Breonna Taylor and David McAtee in Louisville on June 1.
$$$
