Chamber calls on mayor to boost downtown safety
Costello, Darcy
28 July 2020
Louisville's regional chamber of commerce, on behalf of business owners anxious about safety and an upcoming decision on charges against police officers in Breonna Taylor's case, is calling on Mayor Greg Fischer to provide "clear accountability and leadership."
In a letter to Fischer obtained by The Courier Journal, Greater Louisville Inc.'s president and CEO says the chamber has received an "outpouring of concerns, confusion and emotions from businesses" in response to the city's handling of "racial unrest" amid the ongoing crises of "violence, racial injustice and Covid-19."
"Until concerns of public safety for all are addressed, the pathway to establishing community trust and confidence is unclear," CEO Sarah Davasher-Wisdom writes, requesting further information on the Fischer administration's plan moving forward.
For nearly two months, protesters have maintained a constant presence in downtown Louisville, where they've demanded justice for Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was shot and killed by police during a narcotics investigation in March.
The protests have at times turned violent, with several businesses looted in late May and early June.
And, Davasher-Wisdom writes, "anxiety builds" as businesses and the community await the conclusion of state and federal investigations into Taylor's death and the potential for "vandalism and violence that may occur throughout Louisville as a direct response to the findings."
In an interview with The Courier Journal, Davasher-Wisdom said the chamber is very concerned about downtown, describing a "delicate balance between seeking justice and maintaining order."
"We can't begin messaging what a great downtown we have until there is a sense of safety," she said. "We need the mayor to lay out clear plans to help people feel safe."
She said the chamber had a teleconference call with Fischer last week with several business industry representatives, in which they asked questions about how Fischer planned to handle enforcement as the community looks ahead to an announcement about whether officers involved in Taylor's death will be criminally charged.
In an emailed statement, Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter said LMPD has regular meetings with protest leaders to outline what is permitted and continues to have a "strong presence" of officers downtown.
With regard for anticipated future protests, Porter said the city is "prepared" and will convey as much information as possible without threatening the effectiveness of plans.
"We appreciate the concern and support of our local businesses and want to assure them that LMPD is continuing its work to allow the constitutional right to protest while also providing a safe and productive place for businesses and residents to thrive," Porter wrote.
And, Porter said, the mayor's office has held multiple conversations with GLI and will continue to do so, adding that the administration appreciates "those who want to be a part of the solution as we move forward."
Davasher-Wisdom writes in the letter that as decisions are being made to announce the result of the federal and state investigations into Taylor's death, "prior communication and planning" is necessary for the entire community to prepare for "potentially dangerous situations that threaten life and property."
The July 21 letter goes on to ask a series of questions, including:
What steps will be taken by leaders and law enforcement to ensure people and property don't suffer further damage?
How can the city expect laws, regulations and ordinances to be enforced?
Will curfews and permits be deployed and, if so, actually enforced?
If the city cannot protect property or provide communication to allow businesses to plan for potential damage, will the city provide dedicated funds to fix buildings?
GLI is not alone in its questions about the Fischer administration's enforcement efforts.
A bipartisan group of nine Louisville Metro Council members sent a letter to Fischer last week stating that they were increasingly concerned about a lack of enforcement of ordinances and laws "designed to protect our community." (Fischer wrote in a response Monday that council members should not confuse officers deescalating a situation with a failure to enforce the law.)
And a separate letter from the owner of a Louisville office building that warned downtown would "wither and die" if circumstances persisted has made recent headlines — and gotten pushback from those who point out that the state of businesses downtown is also due to COVID-19 and that it had been losing office tenants prior to both the pandemic and protests.
"Let me be clear. Downtown business leaders are not keeping employees at home and out of the office solely because of COVID," wrote Mark Karasick, a managing member of the company that owns 400 West Market. "They are keeping them home because they see no clear plan of action and are unwilling to bring employees back to existing (Central Business District) offices because they are unable to guarantee their safety."
The GLI letter additionally pointed to "severe frustrations from rank and file officers" reported by local media outlets with regard to how the city has handled protests. In early June, police officers walked out on Fischer when he showed up at a roll call, and hundreds rallied earlier this month to support police.
"What steps are being taken to provide support and clear directives so LMPD can appropriately respond while still allowing peaceable assembly?" Davasher-Wisdom asked in the letter.
Taylor, 26, was shot and killed by Louisville police who were at her apartment to execute a "no-knock" search warrant in connection with a narcotics investigation.
Police maintain they announced their presence, but Taylor's boyfriend, who was in the apartment, has said he and Taylor couldn't hear who was at the door.
When police broke open the apartment's door around 12:40 a.m., her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired what he described as a "warning" shot that struck Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the leg.
Officers then returned fire, striking Taylor five times. She died in her hallway.
The case, which has gained national attention, is under independent investigation by the state attorney general and FBI. A "substantially complete" internal LMPD investigation into the three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment on March 13 was turned over to the outside agencies on May 20.
The attorney general is expected to make a determination on whether the officers should face criminal charges, while the U.S. Department of Justice will evaluate their conduct for potential federal criminal charges. No timeline has been given for either.
Demonstrations for racial justice and "justice for Breonna" have continued in Louisville's downtown since late May — some of the city's most persistent protests in more than 50 years — and have called for the firing, arrest and prosecution of officers Mattingly, Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove, the three officers police say fired their weapons that night.
Hankison has been terminated from the department and is appealing that decision, while Cosgrove and Mattingly remain on administrative reassignment.
The nightly protests have largely been peaceful, but Tyler Gerth, a protester, was shot and killed at Jefferson Square Park last month, and police have arrested demonstrators on criminal charges on numerous occasions. Most of those cases are still pending.
In the first days of protests, downtown did suffer property damage and some looting took place — leading Fischer to call in the National Guard and set a citywide curfew.
Much of downtown still has boarded up windows.
Davasher-Wisdom writes in her letter that a survey by the Louisville Downtown Partnership found that a third of respondents have boards on their windows and doors and, of those, 84% do not feel comfortable removing them.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Larry Urbano and Ashley Hayworth sweep glass from the sidewalk along Fourth Street on May 30 following a night of protests and violence in downtown Louisville. Their son Gio, 2, rode along on Urbano's shoulders.
$$$
