Protest streamers say LMPD targets them
Aulbach, Lucas
07 July 2020
"LMPD has no issue with anyone livestreaming. But many of those livestreaming are also protesting. And anyone protesting who fails to follow police orders to disperse may be arrested."
Lamont Washington, LMPD spokesman
At Jefferson Square Park, Louisville protesters say, a cellphone in your hand puts a target on your back.
Several people who have built followings by airing live footage on social media of the ongoing Breonna Taylor protests said Sunday that Louisville Metro Police made it a point of emphasis to crack down on them last week.
Chea K. Woolfolk was arrested early Wednesday morning and is facing a felony riot charge. Jason Downey, another well-known livestreamer, was charged with two misdemeanors. MacKenzie Kraps is facing two felony charges, first-degree wanton endangerment of a police officer and third-degree assault of a social services worker, after being taken out of her car by police and arrested early Wednesday morning as well. Her livestream kept running in near silence for another 30 minutes after the arrest, with an officer at one point taking it from her vehicle.
Those arrests, Maxwell Mitchell said Sunday, are part of a pattern. He's been filming the protests every day, airing the footage on his Facebook page, and he said police have targeted those who have used their cellphones to broadcast from Jefferson Square Park — "literally being tackled and targeted."
"The thing is, the police denied that that was happening," Mitchell, who said he's either a "livestreaming protester or protesting livestreamer," told the crowd. "But you could see the truth in those livestreams, the faces of the police officers literally looking through the crowds for a specific person. How could you deny that when, once again, the livestreaming is showing the truth?"
Louisville police officers aren't making a specific effort to arrest those filming the protests, department spokesman Lamont Washington said. But camera or no camera, those who fail to comply with police can face consequences.
"LMPD has no issue with anyone livestreaming," Washington said. "But many of those livestreaming are also protesting. And anyone protesting who fails to follow police orders to disperse may be arrested."
Mitchell, Woolfolk and other livestreamers took the mic Sunday morning during a Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression press conference in Louisville's West End.
The dozen speakers at the hourlong event hit on several topics. They encouraged Hillard Heintze, the consulting firm conducting a review of LMPD, to work with community members during their probe, and pleaded for officials to take note of the issues that occurred at last month's primary election and adjust as November's election approaches.
Arrests of livestreamers, though, was a point speakers kept circling back to.
Woolfolk made it clear she isn't going anywhere. She's been back to the protests at Jefferson Square Park since the arrest, and she'd been a regular sight at them beforehand, often bringing her two kids (and one time her 71-year-old mother, who had protested earlier in her life as well).
Still, she and others pointed to her arrest and the arrest of Downey as examples of racism by police. Both were arrested near Jefferson Square Park early Wednesday while filming, but Woolfolk was charged with a felony while all of Downey's charges were misdemeanors. Downey pointed out the disparity in a Facebook post last week, and others made a note of it at Sunday's press conference at the Carl Braden Memorial Center on Broadway.
Live footage from the demonstrations, Woolfolk said, clears up one-sided narratives that can emerge in the following days, she said, and it shows, without any filter, what's happening at the scene at that time.
"I try to make sure that everybody, if they can't come out, I always say, 'Come and hang with me. Catch the vibe and just see what it's like,'" Woolfolk, a radio personality on 106.3 FM, told The Courier Journal. "I don't like that they judge folks at the Square, that they judge protesters by that one narrative. ... I want to dispel the myths and show the truths."
That footage, according to speakers like livestreamer and Wave FM Online co-owner Antonio Taylor, is like body camera footage from police officers.
"Our message to the LMPD is you keep your cameras on, we will keep ours on," Taylor said. "And the story being told through both lenses will lead us all to the natural truth ."
Woolfolk, like most other protesters arrested late June 30 and early Wednesday, got out of jail at around 10 a.m. Wednesday. Stopping her livestreams, she said, is "not my plan."
"Am I cautious? Yeah – I've got to be honest, yeah. Am I moving a little differently? Of course," Woolfolk said. "But I'm not going to stop. At this point, if what we're doing wasn't so powerful, they wouldn't try to stop us."
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach.
"LMPD has no issue with anyone livestreaming. But many of those livestreaming are also protesting. And anyone protesting who fails to follow police orders to disperse may be arrested."
Lamont Washington, LMPD spokesman
Maxwell Mitchell, center, at a Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression news conference Sunday. Mitchell says he is a livestreaming protester.
$$$
