Student group asks UK to reform campus culture, honor Taylor
Ladd, Sarah
09 July 2020
"It felt like it was a war, like they declared war on us. We were peaceful. We weren't violent."
Khari Gardner
UK senior, talking about use of force at the Washington, D.C., protest that made him feel like an enemy of the state
While Khari Gardner ran the 10 blocks from Lafayette Square to his parked car in Washington, D.C., last month to escape police tear gas during a protest, only one thing was on his mind.
How can I make a difference?
Gardner, a Baltimore native and a University of Kentucky senior studying business, got to work talking to his friends and coordinating a new student organization, the Movement for Black Lives at the University of Kentucky.
The group, now a month old, has since sent a letter of campus cultural reform demands to President Eli Capilouto, the board of trustees and Sonja Feist-Price, the vice president for institutional diversity.
Before dashing to his car that night in early June, Gardner had been in D.C. to peacefully protest the death of George Floyd by police and said the use of force made him feel like an enemy of the state.
"It felt like it was a war, like they declared war on us. We were peaceful. We weren't violent," said Gardner, who dreamed for years of attending UK but said once he got there, he didn't feel like he was part of the community.
He's been called racial slurs while walking on campus. He's felt threatened. He's felt unsafe going out on campus.
"I don't want that to happen to any other student," he said. "I want this community to be inclusive for everybody."
It was that desire that drove him to draft the letter, sent days ago to UK officials, asking that the university "take an aggressive stand and be at the forefront for a new model of campus culture."
Among the demands were more training for the University of Kentucky Police Department, renaming the Kirwan-Blanding Residence Hall Complex and Dining Commons for Breonna Taylor and doing more to financially and emotionally foster diversity on campus.
Gardner said the removal of something old and the creation of something new is the perfect time to honor Taylor, a former UK student.
The letter also seeks that the university cut ties with any "symbols and glorification" of the Confederacy on campus, which Gardner said includes the renaming of Rupp Arena and Breckinridge Hall.
Breckinridge Hall was named for William Campbell Preston Breckinridge, who fought for the Confederacy. Rupp Arena was named for Adolph Rupp, long controversial for an apparent bucking at integration.
Breckinridge, Gardner said, is "not somebody we should be glorifying on our campus. ... Kentucky was never a part of the Confederacy, so he went out of his way to join the Confederacy. And so people can't claim that was about a heritage."
As for the renaming of Rupp Arena, Gardner added: "Adolph Rupp was a real racist." It's time, he said, that "we can find a new way to glorify that and glorify our rich sports history beyond that one man."
"We share the goal of creating and sustaining a more just, equitable and accepting campus for everyone," said Jay Blanton, a university spokesman. "We hope the students, who are asking questions and raising thoughtful concerns, will be part of these efforts along with what we expect will be hundreds directly involved in this critical process."
UK recently announced a series of changes for the campus community, including the recognition of Juneteenth as a holiday; the establishment of a Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Implementation Plan; diversity and race proficiency training for faculty and teaching assistants; more funding for diverse employee recruitment; working to include more diverse art on campus; a research alliance to student health disparities; and a student advisory group to better promote a higher education career pipeline, among other things.
Blanton said dialogue is "necessary," but that the committees and programs recently launched "will have deadlines for concrete recommendations and actions plans."
Police reform is especially important to the group, Gardner said, and he wants more people to be empathetic to the "radical" idea of minimizing police weaponry.
"I've had experiences where I don't feel comfortable interacting with a police officer with a weapon, especially in a learning environment," he said. "It's an occupying force and it distracts from the point that we're educating and (we're chasing an) inclusive environment."
According to UKPD's website, each campus police officer graduates from the Kentucky Department of Criminal Justice Training or an equivalent, meets all of the state's Peace Officer Professional Standards and completes 40 hours annually of in-service training.
Blanton said the officers will continue to be trained in verbal deescalation and handling people with cognitive challenges.
"UKPD also has received training for working with segments of the community with different identities," Blanton said, referring to the 2017 establishment of the LGBTQ Liaison position. "It was a groundbreaking way to actively demonstrate the department's support of, and commitment to building relationships with, members of the LGBTQ* community."
The group has also asked for removal of items acquired through the federal 1033 program, through which Blanton said UKPD got two Humvee trucks for transporting health care workers to and from the hospital during bad weather and 10 rifles, which should only be used in the case of an active shooter on campus.
If the group's demands aren't met, Gardner said, students may have to press the issue harder once everyone gets back to campus. He's invited other students to sign his petition at linktr.ee/breonnatayloruky.
"I don't think there's hatred in the hearts of president Capilouto or anybody else," he said. "At the same time, it's a systemic institutional culture issue. And you have to be more committed than performative actions to make real change."
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"It felt like it was a war, like they declared war on us. We were peaceful. We weren't violent."
Khari Gardner
UK senior, talking about use of force at the Washington, D.C., protest that made him feel like an enemy of the state
A student group has asked UK leadership to reform its campus culture.
$$$
