Council panel investigating Fischer issues first subpoenas
Costello, Darcy
05 Aug 2020
The Metro Council committee investigating Mayor Greg Fischer's handling of the Breonna Taylor case and ongoing racial justice protests authorized its first subpoenas on Monday, after administration officials declined to testify in open session.
Louisville's chief of public safety and interim police chief appeared in person for Monday's special hearing, but their attorneys said both would be unable to testify unless the committee went into closed session, citing a recently filed federal lawsuit and state law around open meetings.
That legal argument didn't convince many committee members, with the chairman, Councilman Brent Ackerson, D-26th District, suggesting the mayor's administration was trying to hide behind the lawsuit.
"There's a clear distinction between not wanting to mess up an investigation by a law enforcement body and hiding the truth in a civil lawsuit," Ackerson said. "My sole focus is to get the truth out to the public about what's happening and why. The facts are what they are. They're not going to change."
The committee then voted 10-1 to authorize subpoenas for Amy Hess, chief of public safety, and interim Louisville Metro Police Chief Robert Schroeder, describing the move as a way for a judge to decide whether their attorneys' legal argument against testifying had merit.
The sole "no" vote, Councilman Bill Hollander, D-9th, said he needed more time to study the issue, expressing frustration that the committee hadn't been briefed on the brewing conflict prior to the start of the committee meeting.
In a statement after the committee's vote, Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter said she understands people in the city want answers and that "we want them too."
"We remain committed to sharing information as soon as we can without jeopardizing pending investigations," Porter wrote. "The Committee chair was well aware before they set up today's meeting that there are matters that we are legally not allowed to share, and they were advised of our concerns about proceeding at this time."
"We look forward to returning to Council when all concerns have been properly addressed," Porter added.
While Hess and Schroeder's testimony is up in the air, and likely the subject of a court fight, committee members signaled the investigation's next focus would be on Elliott Avenue, where a police unit's work has been scrutinized in connection with the March 13 death of Breonna Taylor.
The new Place-Based Investigations Unit focused work on a few blocks on Elliott Avenue in Louisville's Russell neighborhood, in what Taylor's attorneys argue was an effort to gentrify the area to make way for a new development project.
City officials have rebuffed the attorneys' claims, dismissing it as a "false narrative" and arguing the targeted policing initiative is a tool to reduce violent crime.
The committee appeared to agree to invite several officials connected to the unit and the city's economic development work in that area, including Mary Ellen Widerwohl, the chief of the city's economic development arm, Louisville Forward; Joshua Watkins, who was involved in supervising the police unit; and the Rev. Bo Stilwell, head of a nonprofit hired by the city to lead community engagement efforts.
The Elliott Avenue situation was not part of what officials were expected to testify about on Monday. Those topics were expected to include:
Vandalism and the response to it;
Use of teargas and/or pepperballs;
How the media became a "target," including the WAVE3 reporter and cameraman who were shot at with nonlethal weapons;
Directives given by leadership and any confusion;
Any "stand down" orders that were issued; and
How law enforcement came to be at 26th and Broadway the night David McAtee was shot and killed.
The committee and attorneys representing Hess and Schroeder had agreed to not center questions around Taylor's and McAtee's death, as they are under pending investigation. Taylor's death is the subject of investigations by the state attorney general and FBI, while McAtee's is being investigated by Kentucky State Police.
Since that agreement, however, there was a "significant development," said Hess' attorney, David Guarnieri, pointing to the civil rights lawsuit filed last Thursday by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky arguing Louisville Metro Police had repeatedly used force and intimidation against peaceful protesters in the city.
It specifically names Schroeder, but not Hess, who is above Schroeder in the chain of command and reports directly to the mayor.
"When we compare the allegations in the civil rights lawsuit just filed on July 30 with the topics on today's agenda ... there is absolutely a complete overlap," Guarnieri said.
And, he argued, under the state's Open Meetings Act, if meeting topics are expected to touch on "pending litigation," then testimony should be taken in closed session.
In a Monday letter shared with The Courier Journal, Guarnieri asked that the committee reschedule Schroeder and Hess to another day "when they can reasonably and prudently testify."
"Just as the Committee already recognized the need to balance the integrity of the AG and FBI investigations with its audit and oversight authority, we ask that the Committee also recognize the need to balance the important interests the General Assembly protected" in state law, he wrote.
The council committee's attorney, Jonathan Ricketts, disagreed with that interpretation of the statute, prompting a back-and-forth between attorneys and council members.
In Ricketts' response to Guarnieri on Monday, he wrote that just because clients may "find it personally unpleasant and untimely to discuss these topics in the open," exceptions to open meetings laws are not to be used to shield agencies from "unwanted or unpleasant public input, interference or scrutiny."
Hess, Schroeder and their attorneys left the meeting before it ended, after Ackerson refused to allow it to go into closed session. Hess' attorney said she was "committed to coming back." It was less clear what Schroeder's openness to returning would be.
"We're not going into executive session," Ackerson said. "There will be nothing hidden from the public regarding this matter. Zero. Plain and simple. That being said, if you're not going to proceed, there's the door."
The Government Oversight and Audit Committee voted last month to initiate an investigation into Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, McAtee's death and protests in the city.
It previously discussed issuing subpoenas for Schroeder and former police Chief Steve Conrad, but opted instead to first invite officials to testify under oath.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/darcyc.
$$$
