'We have to keep the pressure on'
Loosemore, Bailey
14 Aug 2020
Local and national activists are calling on Louisville officials to stop "antagonizing" protesters and instead focus on investigating the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
At a press conference Thursday, members of Until Freedom, a New York-based social justice organization, denounced the Louisville Metro Police Department's recent statement that it will crack down on protesters who block traffic, saying the move is meant to "intimidate" people ahead of the Kentucky Derby.
And they announced several events and demonstrations that will continue protests in the city — including a "large demonstration" on Aug. 25.
"We're here because we believe that our city, the mayor and others have acted as obstructionists," local pastor Timothy Findley said at the conference. "... They've put more emphasis on containing protesters than doing their job. We are thankful for Until Freedom, and we will not stop this fight until we see justice."
In a wide-ranging press conference, the co-chairs of Until Freedom invited local activists, attorney Ben Crump and even comedian Nick Cannon to speak about the civil unrest that has taken place in Louisville since Taylor was killed during a failed narcotics investigation at her South End apartment in March.
Since May 28, there have been daily marches and demonstrations across the city, with hundreds of people calling for the officers who shot Taylor to be criminally charged.
Until Freedom has been involved in several large protests in Louisville during that time, including a sit-in at the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, whose office is deciding what, if any, state criminal charges the officers will face.
Co-chair Tamika Mallory said members of the group plan to stay in Louisville and continue organizing demonstrations and events until justice for Taylor is received.
The group's next event is a food giveaway at noon Saturday at the Urban League, 1535 W. Broadway, followed by "Breonna Con" on Aug. 22 and 23 — when the group plans to host community service opportunities, educational sessions on criminal justice and voter registration drives, Mallory said.
On Aug. 25, the group will conduct a "large action" meant to draw people back into the protests, which have fluctuated in recent weeks.
More information about the action and other events will be released at a later date, Mallory said.
"People are dragging their feet (on Taylor's case) because they hope we go home," she said. "And ... we cannot go home. We cannot get tired. We have to keep the pressure on, and that's what Until Freedom is here to do."
Crump, a nationally known attorney who is representing Taylor's family in a civil suit, thanked Until Freedom for taking part in the Louisville protests and said he has personally asked Mayor Greg Fischer to meet with activists instead of "antagonizing" them.
"Who knows that there may be a young Louisville citizen who may be the next John Lewis in your midst, Mayor Fischer," Crump said. "Don't fight him, encourage him. Don't fight her, encourage her. This is about the future."
Cannon, dressed in a hoodie that helped him blend into the crowd, said he came to Louisville to support local protesters. And he encouraged media outlets to "document this in the right way."
"These people, my sisters and brothers, are here on the front lines for real change," the entertainer said. "And for no other reason, I'm coming here to stand in solidarity with them. ... So I thank you all for being here and thank you all for doing the right thing."
$$$
