JCPS teacher a constant presence at protests
26 July 2020
"I have to do this."
Tyra Walker
Tyra Walker is used to people not listening to her.
At Roosevelt-Perry Elementary, she teaches students who have mental and behavioral challenges. And they don't always like to follow her instructions.
Walker is trained to keep her cool in those scenarios. She's certified in safe crisis management, and when students disrupt her class, she knows how to calm them so the situation doesn't escalate.
She says she wishes Louisville police would give her and other people protesting the death of Breonna Taylor the same respect.
"What they're doing right now is they're escalating it," Walker said of officers' encounters with protesters who have been occupying Jefferson Square Park since May 28.
"You come to anybody being aggressive, they're going to get on the defense. They need to learn how to interact and approach people the right way. They're afraid of us, so they don't know how to respond," she added.
"We are people. We just want to be treated as such."
Walker, 48, is a Louisville native who attended public schools in Jefferson County.
She has three children who've also been raised here, and she helps care for five nieces and nephews who were left with her mother when her sister died.
She worries about all of them growing up in a society that continues to devalue and fear Black lives. And she said they're the reason she's been drawn to the ongoing protests in Jefferson Square Park.
Walker is a co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, a long-running nonprofit that works to provide education and space for discussions on racial injustice.
She's been at Jefferson Square Park all but three days over the past seven weeks. And she sees her role there as a mentor, helping guide young protesters on how to stay safe.
Some of them are JCPS students. Some are other teachers. All want justice for Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed by police in March. And Walker wants to make sure no one gets hurt while they fight to get it.
Walker knows that the park, at times, has turned violent. She was there the June 27 night photographer Tyler Gerth was shot and killed.
But like many people who keep returning day after day, she also knows what it's like to feel pulled there. To feel like she has to be part of the movement — both for herself and her kids.
"We're asking for a mile, and right now, they're giving us inches," Walker said of the city's response to protesters' demands, which include firing all three officers involved in Taylor's death.
"I just feel like I have to do this," she said.
"I have to be here. As tired as I am, tomorrow's going to be hard for me to stay at home."
"I have to do this."
Tyra Walker
Tyra Walker of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racism and Poltical Oppression held back tears about a recent shooting.
$$$
