State Senate GOP blames Fischer
Sonka, Joe
03 Sep 2020
FRANKFORT — The leadership of Kentucky's Senate Republican majority said Tuesday that Louisville Mayor Fischer has failed the city during increasing violence and civil unrest, calling for Gov. Andy Beshear's help to "restore order."
Citing a record pace of murders, increased carjackings and civil unrest that has "wreaked havoc" on downtown Louisville businesses throughout the summer, Senate President Robert Stivers called for the Democratic governor to meet with them and hear their ideas.
"It is not within our purview constitutionally, or anything else, to run or have our positions put in a place of substituting that of Metro Council," Stivers said. "But it is clear to many of us that the mayor has failed to do his job, and we are looking to the governor now."
Sen. Julie Raque Adams, R-Louisville, delivered a letter to Beshear on Monday highlighting Louisville's significant increase in violent crime and the downtown becoming a "boarded-up mess," as Fischer "has been unable or unwilling to protect private property."
She went on to plead for the governor's help, as "we need your focus, plans, and leadership in the state's largest city to begin healing from the violence, and generating an economic recovery."
"I stand ready and willing to help in and with your plans for Louisville's rescue," Adams wrote. "I know my colleagues in the State Senate also stand prepared to restore order and security to our neighbors, our property, and our businesses. Governor the time for partnership is now."
In a statement after the press conference, Fischer said it would be easy to describe it as "partisan politics," but "the truth is, I think it's reassuring to hear our state legislators offering support to Louisville."
Fischer then went on to lay out more than a dozen changes he'd like to see from the state legislature, including:
Giving subpoena power to local civilian review boards of police departments.
Creating a statewide team to investigate police shootings in Kentucky.
Amending state law to allow police and public officials to discuss pending internal disciplinary cases of police officers.
Banning no-knock warrants statewide.
Requiring all police departments to use body cameras.
Banning the use of chokeholds, neck restraints, strangleholds and weight on subjects' necks unless necessary to save the life of another person.
"Cities across the nation are facing many challenges right now — COVID-19, an uptick in gun violence, an economic downturn and renewed demands for racial justice — and we need support, and resources," Fischer wrote.
"Our city has already taken many actions to start addressing these problems and we've been talking with legislators, Metro Council, and community about potential needs from the state," he added, before listing changes. "I'm glad to see this sense of urgency from our state legislators. We share it."
As for what specific actions the Republicans wanted to see from Beshear, Stivers suggested the governor calling in the National Guard to downtown so businesses could safely reopen and no longer have to board up their windows.
Asked what specifically he would want the National Guard to do, Stivers said he didn't know, though Beshear "has the assessment tools. It may be nothing. Then again, it may be something."
Beshear called the National Guard into downtown Louisville shortly after protests began to swell over the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor by local police officers breaking into her house in a no-knock raid.
On the early morning of June 1, the National Guard was directed to a west Louisville intersection by the Louisville Metro Police Department, where a guardsman fatally shot local business owner David McAtee.
The governor subsequently pulled the guard back after the shooting and they have not been deployed to quell civil unrest in Louisville since that time.
Senate Majority Floor Leader Damon Thayer, R-Georgetown, went on to suggest that Beshear actually condoned the increased murders, carjacking and property damaging in Louisville by not addressing them in his daily briefings.
Beshear expressed shock at these statements in his press briefing shortly afterward, saying: "I'm against all forms of violence. I'm standing up here asking people to be kind every day and to look out after one another."
Adams also suggested Beshear should call a special session of the General Assembly to take up legislation on policing reforms, "so that a lot of these groups who are protesting — legitimately protesting with legitimate issues — that they know that we're listening to them and they know that we hear them."
Noting that Stivers and Rep. Attica Scott, D-Louisville, have proposed two different bills to ban or limit no-knock warrants in Kentucky, Beshear said: "If we have some good pieces of legislation that we can get agreement on, that's something that I'd be willing to work with them and anybody else on."
Reporter Darcy Costello contributed to this post.
$$$
