AG says he has Taylor ballistics test
Byers, Rob
31 Aug 2020
"We've received the FBI ballistics report in the Breonna Taylor investigation. There is still additional analysis that must take place, & our office does not plan to make an announcement this week."
Attorney General Daniel Cameron
In a statement on Twitter
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron announced Sunday morning he is now in possession of the FBI ballistics test in the Breonna Taylor case.
But he said his office will not be making an announcement in the case this week.
Cameron earlier told The Courier Journal the ballistics test was leading to a delay in his investigation of Taylor's killing by Louisville Metro Police in March.
"We've received the FBI ballistics report in the Breonna Taylor investigation," Cameron tweeted. "There is still additional analysis that must take place, & our office does not plan to make an announcement this week. We continue to work diligently to follow the facts and complete the investigation."
Cameron first announced the news of the ballistics report on the CBS news show "Face the Nation" shortly before sending the tweet Sunday morning.
Cameron was in Washington, D.C., last week, when he spoke during the Republican National Convention.
"As part of my time in Washington, D.C., I met with the Department of Justice and FBI," he said on "Face the Nation." "We've got a critical component here as it relates to a ballistics report."
Without conclusive video footage of the events surrounding Taylor's death — the officers were not wearing body cameras — Cameron said the report represents "a critical piece of this investigation," but stressed, "It's not the end all, be all."
"There's still some witness testimony and interviews that have to be conducted ...," he said. "We will be meeting with the FBI at the beginning of this upcoming week to have a painstaking review of that information. And that will help us in the analysis that needs to be undertaken before we can get to final steps."
Ben Crump, a Florida-based attorney representing Taylor's family, appeared on the news show following Cameron.
He called the ballistics report announcement "welcome news," and said, "We are hoping that this conclusion will be sooner rather than later."
Since late May, Louisville has been the scene of daily protests against police brutality and racial injustice. The city is approaching its 100th straight day of protests.
During his Aug. 13 COVID-19 press conference, Gov. Andy Beshear said he thought the investigation would be wrapped up before the delayed running of the Kentucky Derby, coming up on Saturday.
With Cameron's announcement, that will not be the case. An armed Black militia group, the Not F***ing Around Coalition, is planning to protest in Louisville on Derby day. The group, demanding justice for Taylor, first visited the city in late July.
Taylor, 26, died March 13 after LMPD officers broke down her door while executing a no-knock search warrant. Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired a shot, saying he didn't know it was police who were entering.
His shot hit Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh, and police fired more than 20 shots in response, hitting Taylor five times and killing her in her hallway.
One of the officers to return fire, Brett Hankison, has been fired and is appealing that decision.
The other two officers to fire their weapons, Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove, are on administrative reassignment, pending the investigation.
Rob Byers: 502-582-4352; rbyers@gannett.com; Twitter: @RobertJByers.
"We've received the FBI ballistics report in the Breonna Taylor investigation. There is still additional analysis that must take place, & our office does not plan to make an announcement this week."
Attorney General Daniel Cameron
In a statement on Twitter
$$$
