Sen. Rand Paul: I was 'attacked by an angry mob' following RNC
Tobin, Ben
29 Aug 2020
U.S. Sen. Rand Paul was surrounded by a group of protesters who he said threatened his life as he was heading back to his hotel in Washington, D.C., from the White House following the conclusion of the Republican National Convention early Friday.
"Just got attacked by an angry mob of over 100, one block away from the White House," Paul wrote in a tweet at 1:39 a.m. Friday. "Thank you to @DCPoliceDept for literally saving our lives from a crazed mob."
Protesters took to the streets in the nation's capital Thursday evening as President Donald Trump formally accepted his party's nomination for a second term in a speech from the South Lawn of the White House. Paul, an attendee of the Republican National Convention, gave a speech Tuesday in support of Trump's reelection.
Videos on social media show protesters surrounding Paul and his wife, Kelley Ashby Paul, on a crowded block. Protesters chanted, "No justice, no peace" and "Say her name, Breonna Taylor."
In the videos, police formed a perimeter around the Pauls, telling protesters to "move back." At one point, an officer appears to be pushed and almost falls, with Paul appearing to catch him.
The junior senator from Kentucky told "Fox and Friends" in an interview Friday morning that he and his wife were unharmed, but that without police, "I don't think we would have survived."
He added that he believes some of the protesters who confronted him were out-of-town agitators paid to come Washington to "incite a riot."
"I don't hear Joe Biden or Kamala Harris saying one thing about the violence. This mob is their voters. This is the new Democrat party. And if we don't resist this, the United States is going to become Portland," Paul said, referring to the Oregon city that has been gripped by protests for months.
He added: "We can't let our cities be taken over by these marauders and thugs."
In response to Paul's tweet, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, a Republican from Texas, described the incident as "horrific."
"Our prayers are with you, my friend," Cruz wrote in a tweet Friday morning directed at Paul. "This madness has to stop."
U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie, who represents Kentucky's 4th Congressional District, tweeted Friday morning that he appreciates his fellow Bluegrass State congressional colleague for standing by his principles.
"Senator Paul had his ribs broken, was shot at during baseball practice, and now this," Massie wrote in a tweet, referring to the 2018 assault by Paul's neighbor and the 2017 shooting at a congressional baseball practice. "I so appreciate that he is still willing to stand for us, often times alone or with just a few in the Senate, even while faced by real and present violence from radical leftists."
Hannah Drake, a poet and activist in Louisville, said in response to Paul's comments that Black people have to fear for their safety every day, and that is why people are protesting.
"Black people cant drive, walk down the street, swim, bbq, ride a bike, jog, be sleeping in their homes, playing video games in their home, etc without possibly being harassed or murdered," Drake wrote in a tweet Friday morning. "They don't get it. (Paul) was 'harassed' for 3 minutes. Imagine that feeling DAILY!!!"
Paul was not alone in being confronted by protesters overnight: Democratic Georgia state Rep. Vernon Jones, who controversially endorsed Trump, was also approached as police separated protesters from him.
These incidents have come as, back in Paul's home state of Kentucky, protesters in Louisville have been marching for more than 90 days to demand justice for Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who was unarmed when fatally shot by police inside her home in March.
In June, Paul filed federal legislation to prohibit police officers across the country from using no-knock warrants like the one that led to the fatal shooting of Taylor. The Louisville Metro Council voted unanimously on June 11 to ban no-knock warrants.
"I'm actually the author of the Breonna Taylor law to end no-knock raids," Paul told "Fox and Friends."
"So the irony is lost on these idiots that they're trying to kill the person who's actually trying to get rid of no-knock raids."
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, who will make the decision on whether to charge the Louisville Metro Police officers involved in the fatal shooting of Taylor, condemned the protesters who confronted Paul in a tweet Friday morning.
"No public official of either party should be treated like Senator @RandPaul and his wife Kelley were last night," wrote Cameron, who also spoke at the Republican National Convention. "These actions have no place among peaceful calls for change in this country."
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., center, and others are escorted Thursday night after a crowd had enveloped Paul and demanded that he acknowledge police shooting victim Breonna Taylor.
$$$
