Fischer suspends no-knock warrants
Costello, Darcy; Duvall, Tessa
30 May 2020
The morning after a large protest swept across downtown Louisville streets, demanding justice for Breonna Taylor, Mayor Greg Fischer announced no-knock warrants will be temporarily suspended, telling protesters "I hear you."
Fischer, who pleaded for peaceful protests, also signaled he would call for a civilian review board over Louisville Metro Police with subpoena powers – another change that activists have called for in the wake of Taylor's death.
"These changes and more to come – we're not done – should signal that I hear the community. We will continue to make improvements anywhere that we can. Breonna Taylor's name and her story will now be part of our city's history," he said.
"But as Breonna's family shared last night, answering violence with violence only makes things worse."
What began as a peaceful protest demanding justice for Taylor – starting just hours after her boyfriend's frantic 911 call from the aftermath of her death was released to the public – escalated as the night drew on. The crowd was teargassed by police, an LMPD vehicle nearly overturned and glass storefronts shattered.
At least seven people were shot, and one remains in critical condition. Fischer and police officials have said the investigation into the shooting is ongoing, and no one has been arrested, but they stressed that no LMPD officers fired their weapons during the protest. Two officers were taken to the hospital with chest pains, said LaVita Chavous, LMPD's assistant chief of police.
Taylor, 26, a Louisville ER tech, was killed in the early morning hours of March 13 after officers executed a no-knock search warrant in connection with a narcotics investigation at her home. Her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, has said he fired one shot as officers entered the home, not realizing that they were police. He struck Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the femoral artery.
Walker was originally charged with attempted murder of a police officer in connection with the event, but charges against him were dismissed last week by the commonwealth's attorney, who called for more investigation.
Taylor was shot to death by police in their return fire.
No drugs were recovered from the home. Neither Taylor nor Walker had previous drug-related criminal charges or convictions.
Many protesters have called for the officers involved in her shooting – named by LMPD as Mattingly, Officer Brett Hankison and Officer Myles Cosgrove – to be fired.
Fischer didn't announce any new developments in their case Friday. He has said his administration turned over the police department's internal investigation into the shooting to the state attorney general, who will determine whether the officers' conduct warrants criminal charges.
He also sent the findings to the U.S. Attorney's Office and the FBI, which has since announced it opened its own independent investigation.
Fischer said Friday he wanted to "work together as a community to prevent further tragedies."
And he pleaded with protesters to peacefully demonstrate, reading aloud a statement from Taylor's family that said the "last thing" Taylor would want to see is "any more violence."
"We will not stop until there's truth, justice and accountability," the statement said. "Breonna's legacy will not be forgotten."
But, it added, let's keep "demanding justice" without hurting one another.
"We can and we will make some real change here," it said. "Now's the time. Let's make it happen – safely."
Backlash to no-knock warrants No-knock warrants have become an especially controversial topic in recent weeks after it was revealed that Louisville police obtained a search warrant with a no-knock clause for Taylor's apartment the night she died.
Police planned to search Taylor's southwest Louisville apartment as a part of a larger narcotics investigation, of which Taylor was not the main target.
Court records show that at least five warrants with no-knock clauses were signed by Circuit Judge Mary Shaw for the night Taylor died: Taylor's apartment on Springfield Drive, a suspected drug house in the Russell neighborhood on Elliott Avenue, two vacant homes nearby on Elliott Avenue, and a suspected stash house on West Muhammad Ali Boulevard.
The warrant for the Muhammad Ali Boulevard house was not executed, court records show, though police did not specify why. The warrants for Taylor's apartment and Elliott Avenue were carried out at nearly the exact same time.
At Taylor's apartment that morning, police have said officers knocked and announced themselves prior to entering with a battering ram.
A snippet of a police interview played by Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine included Mattingly, the sergeant who was injured in the raid, describing how officers got in place and banged on the door.
"We didn't announce the first couple because our intent was not to hit the door," Mattingly said. "Our intent was to give her plenty of time to come to the door because she was probably there alone."
Mattingly banged on the door. No response, he said. He banged again, and still got no response.
"At that point we start announcing ourselves," he said. "'Police! Please come to the door. Police! We have a search warrant.'"
Attorneys for Taylor's family cited multiple neighbors who said officers did not knock and announce themselves. Rob Eggert, Walker's defense attorney, said Walker only fired his shot because he did not know that it was police on the other side of the door.
Inside the apartment, according to police interviews with Walker that Wine played, Walker and Taylor had no idea it was police outside. He told investigators he initially thought it might have been a former boyfriend of Taylor's, but there was no response when Taylor twice called out, "Who is it?"
Then, Walker said he grabbed his gun, "scared to death."
Taylor yelled again "at the top of her lungs," asking who it was, Walker said in the recording. He said he was asking, too, at that point.
They got out of bed and were going toward the door when it "comes off its hinges" and Walker fired one shot, still unable to see, he told police.
Then, gunfire.
Spokeswomen for Fischer did not immediately respond to a request for comment sent Friday about how long no-knock warrants would be suspended in Louisville or what the goal is before they resume.
An ordinance filed in the Metro Council would restrict their use – barring them in cases in which drug possession is the only suspected crime – and add additional monitors.
The sponsors have said they are open to amendments strengthening the language to even more stringently limit the types of cases in which no-knock warrants could be sought.
The legislation is expected to be discussed at a Wednesday Public Safety Committee meeting.
Protesters taunt officers as they take to downtown Louisville into early Friday morning to protest the deaths of Louisville's Breonna Taylor and Minneapolis' George Floyd at the hands of police.
A protester yells at police early Friday morning about deaths of two black people at the hands of police.
$$$
