Stoops joins BLM march
Yates, Dominique
06 June 2020
LEXINGTON, Ky. — It wasn't a big group, but it was a big message.
Black Lives Matter, the Kentucky football team said collectively during an afternoon march through downtown Lexington on Friday.
At least 50 players, along with coach Mark Stoops and some UK assistant coaches, were joined by Lexington police chief Lawrence Weathers and Mayor Linda Gorton. The group walked a half-mile from the downtown Hilton to the steps of the Fayette County Circuit Court.
The players all wore Black Lives Matter t-shirts and masks.
"It was very important for us to come together as a team. I could tell by talking to players individually," Stoops said. "By talking to them as a group — I can't feel their pain. I'm a white person, obviously, and what young, black people go through, I feel for them. I just wanted to listen to them and be there for them. I could just tell that it was a very difficult time for a lot of people, and it still is."
As college football coaches have had mixed responses to the country's – and their team's – response to protests centered on the killing by police of Breonna Taylor, George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, Stoops' presence in leading the expression was meaningful to his players, they said.
"Coach Stoops joined us," said UK redshirt junior defensive end Josh Paschal. "This is a great step for me. I know he has a great heart, but this took it to a whole other level to know he's willing to take that next step for us."
Stoops used a football analogy to explain his position.
"Everybody has to get off the sideline and get in the game and be part of the solution, and that's just the fact," he said. "That's the way it is. Black lives matter, and they matter to me a great deal. I just can't tell you how affected I was by it, and our players wanted to speak out. They wanted to do something. I did as well.
"This will help our players heal some. Hopefully it'll help heal others from the injustices they've had. We just want to do our part. This is an issue that we all can't just put it to the side and move on. We have to continue to talk about this issue and continue to make a difference."
Players there on Friday, black and white, were as unified in that message as they are on Saturday afternoons in the fall.
"It means a lot to know that our teammates that aren't directly affected by this, who don't even look like us — they are supporting us," Paschal said. "They came out here and they walked with us. Even though they can't understand exactly what we're going through, we know that we have their support.
Rana L. Cash contributed to this story.
The Kentucky football team met on the steps of the Fayette Circuit Courthouse to protest. At least 50 players, along with coach Mark Stoops and some UK assistant coaches, were joined by Lexington police chief Lawrence Weathers and Mayor Linda Gorton.
Photos by Dominique Yates
Kentucky football coach Mark Stoops, center, and assistant coach Eddie Gran were among those in attendance at the Black Lives Matter protest in downtown Lexington.
$$$
