Black-led business incubator gets $50K boost from Hollands
Loosemore, Bailey
20 Sep 2020
"I saw the need here in Louisville for particularly underserved communities to come into spaces and incubate, innovate, create, network, be around like-minded individuals. ... Young Black people, specifically, have been left out of the conversation."
Aaron Jordan,Black Complex founder
A Black-led business incubator, on track to open downtown next month, hopes to fill a void in Louisville's entrepreneurial community for young people in need of a space to collaborate, create and innovate.
And Thursday, The Black Complexreceived a large financial boost from two well-known local developers: Gill and Augusta Holland.
The Louisville couple has pledged up to $50,000 in matching funds for The Black Complex, a program through the Global Economic Diversity Development Initiative that will be housed at Encore on 4th, a restaurant and event space at 630 S. Fourth St.
In a press release, the Hollands said "in order to better address the issues we face with racial inequity in our community, we believe we must listen to and invest in our Black leaders who are best equipped to offer solutions."
Gill Holland has come under fire in recent racial justice protests for his role in redeveloping the Portland and NuLu neighborhoods. Local activists have described his projects as gentrification. But GEDDI founder and Encore co-owner Tawana Bain said she views the couple's contribution as the start for "a wave of change in the traditional process of funding Black businesses."
"I, along with the many Black-led organizations normally left out, cannot be more pleased," she said in a press release.
Black Complex founder Aaron Jordan, a regular at the protests that were sparked by the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor, said he has not spoken to the Hollands about the investment. But he's excited to get to work on a project that's been years in the making.
"I saw the need here in Louisville for particularly underserved communities to come into spaces and incubate, innovate, create, network, be around like-minded individuals," Jordan said. "... Young Black people, specifically, have been left out of the conversation."
Programming at the Black Complex will be geared toward such entrepreneurs with Black food, Black music and Black events, Jordan said. But membership will be open to anyone who's interested.
The complex is expected to be open from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday, and it will house a technology center, meeting space and other amenities available to members.
Membership packages will range from $75 to $200. Registration will open Oct. 1 at GEDDI.org.
Jordan said he hopes to partner with local colleges and universities on programs at the complex as well as national artists and entrepreneurs who can speak to members about their industries.
And he wants to "challenge" more people and companies to invest in the incubator.
"Part of the reason we're so far behind in terms of innovation and landscape in this city is we don't expose ourselves to what's going on around the country," Jordan said. "... Black-led spaces are all over the country; women-led spaces are all over the country. People are creating spaces for themselves all over the country. In Kentucky, the majority of spaces are white.
"We need to catch up."
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore.
"I saw the need here in Louisville for particularly underserved communities to come into spaces and incubate, innovate, create, network, be around like-minded individuals. ... Young Black people, specifically, have been left out of the conversation."
$$$
