Bill would ban no-knock searches
Watkins, Morgan
10 July 2020
FRANKFORT — Kentucky Senate President Robert Stivers is working on proposed legislation that would essentially ban standalone, no-knock search warrants like the one Louisville police officers used to enter Breonna Taylor's home in March.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician, died after officers shot her during that search. Protesters in Louisville and around the nation have denounced the use of no-knock search warrants in the wake of her death.
Stivers said Thursday the bill he envisions would make exceptions for no-knock search warrants that are used along with an arrest warrant or in a hostage situation.
"But a no-knock warrant at 1 o'clock at night – that's bad policing," he said of the search warrant the Louisville Metro Police Department secured for Taylor's home.
Law enforcement's search of Taylor's home "would have never taken place" the way it did if a law like the one he's developing had been on the books, Stivers said.
He also said the legislation he's working on would waive qualified immunity for a police officer if there was gross or wanton negligence or willful misconduct during an incident that involved a no-knock search warrant (in cases in which one legally could be used, such as in a hostage situation).
Qualified immunity shields officers from liability in civil lawsuits and has been scrutinized closely amid widespread protests against police brutality and racism in the U.S.
Stivers, R-Manchester, was cautious Thursday about the idea of eliminating qualified immunity entirely.
"I don't know if you want to go that far because some people act in good faith, and people make mistakes," he told reporters during a news conference that afternoon.
The future legislation is far from final.
The GOP controls both the state Senate and the Kentucky House of Representatives, but Stivers said he and other senators, both Republican and Democrat, are just beginning a process that he hopes will lead to a bipartisan bill.
He indicated the eventual proposal likely will include other rules law enforcement would have to follow in order to obtain and use a no-knock warrant in selective situations.
There is already bipartisan interest in Stivers' plan.
State Sen. Gerald Neal, D-Louisville, joined the Senate president at Thursday's press conference and said he appreciated the tone Stivers set for this burgeoning discussion.
Neal also made it clear he wants to see action taken on this and other policing issues.
"But what is encouraging here is that now it looks like we have an opportunity, and history will not be kind to us if we do not take advantage of this opportunity to do that which is right," he told reporters.
Stivers' proposal also has the interest of at least two Republican state senators who have worked in law enforcement, John Schickel and Danny Carroll.
Schickel, R-Union, said Stivers' nascent proposal is a step in the right direction.
Meanwhile, Carroll, R-Paducah, said he expects to be a "voice of balance" and indicated he supports enacting new regulations about how no-knock search warrants are obtained and implemented, although he doesn't necessarily support an outright ban at this point.
"I'm not completely sold on totally doing away with search warrants with no knocks," he said.
"There are times, if you're working a homicide case, that you may have probable cause to believe that a weapon is in a particular residence. You may not have probable cause to arrest the occupant of that residence ... so it could very obviously be a high-risk situation for the officers."
Louisville Metro Council President David James also attended Stivers' announcement Thursday and said he was pleased to see the bipartisanship behind this effort.
The Metro Council unanimously voted last month to prohibit no-knock search warrants in the city, but James noted that a state law like the one Stivers is developing would apply that ban to all of Jefferson County and to communities throughout the commonwealth.
Whatever bill state lawmakers eventually produce won't come up for a vote anytime soon. The legislature doesn't convene for its next lawmaking session until January.
$$$
