Taylor's ex turned down plea deal
Bailey, Phillip M; Costello, Darcy
02 Sep 2020
Breonna Taylor's ex-boyfriend says Louisville prosecutors wanted him to implicate the slain 26-year-old woman when they offered him a plea deal in his ongoing drug case four months after her fatal shooting.
Taylor had no involvement in drugs, and signing the deal would have falsely incriminated her, Jamarcus Glover told USA TODAY/The Courier Journal in a phone interview Monday night from Louisville Metro Corrections. That's why he refused.
"I turned it down from day one when I seen the names on there," Glover said from jail. "They're incriminating other people who had nothing to do with anything."
Glover, who was a fugitive for missing bail since July 27 until being arrested Aug. 27, is facing criminal counts of criminal syndication, drug trafficking and gun charges.
An attorney for Taylor's family posted a photo of a document Monday on Facebook showing prosecutors had extended Glover, an accused narcotics trafficker, a plea offer for 10 years in prison if he would acknowledge Taylor was part of a criminal organization.
Jefferson Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine denied Monday his office had offered Glover a plea deal that sought to implicate Taylor by name in the drug case.
The July 13 "plea sheet" that Sam Aguiar — an attorney representing Taylor's family in a civil suit against the three officers who fired their weapons — shared on social media was a draft as part of preindictment negotiation, Wine said.
It was never part of the court record, Wine said, and it's not a court document.
Taylor was shot and killed as Louisville Metro Police officers attempted to serve a signed no-knock search warrant for her apartment after midnight on March 13. The controversial raid was part of a drug investigation that focused on Glover.
Glover said under the July 13 offer, if he acknowledged he and several "co-defendants," including Taylor, engaged in organized crime, he could possibly have been released on probation depending on the ruling of a sentencing judge.
Taylor was never a co-defendant in the Glover case, Wine said in a news release Monday.
"A case including Breonna Taylor as a co-defendant was never presented to the grand jury nor did our office ever consider presenting one to the grand jury with her name," he said.
Glover disputed Wine's claims, however, saying his attorney presented him the document for consideration, and he took a picture with his cellphone. He told his current girlfriend to release the picture after learning Wine's office had pulled the plea deal.
"How is it a draft and they wanted me to sign it?" Glover asked in Monday night's interview. "You don't put no draft in front of nobody. How would I get it if it's just a draft?"
A spokesman for Wine's office did not respond to a request for comment Tuesday morning.
Ben Crump, a Florida-based lawyer representing Taylor's family with Louisville attorneys Aguiar and Lonita Baker, said in a statement he was outraged that prosecutors would "attempt to justify Breonna Taylor's death" by pushing Glover to "falsely state — after her death — that she was part of an organized crime syndicate."
"The police killed Bre once, and now they're trying to kill her again by killing her reputation and her good name," Crump wrote in a Tuesday news release. "Disgusting behavior by those who are supposed to be the protectors of justice."
But Scott Barton, Glover's attorney, told The Courier Journal on Tuesday the July 13 document was a draft — one of several sent between the office, Barton and Glover. That's typical in plea negotiations, he said.
"By the time we'd finally come to something that Mr. Glover and I talked about, again, (Taylor's) name was nowhere mentioned in the document," Barton said.
Asked what he made of Taylor's name being included in any plea, four months after she'd been killed by police, Barton compared plea negotiations to buying a house, where one side may make an "outrageous offer" just to see if the other side will take it.
"Just like sometimes I ask for things that I know I'm not getting but, you know, let's throw them out there and see," Barton said. "So, I think based on the information they had — the telephone calls and everything else — I think they made it in good faith. We were never going to accept that, but I don't think it was out of line by them."
Wine on Monday released a separate plea offered July 21 that didn't mention Taylor by name.
However, it would have stated as fact Glover and his co-defendants used Taylor's South End apartment "to store proceeds from the trafficking operation."
It also would have required Glover to acknowledge that he listed Taylor's apartment as his address on his bank account and that he picked up a package from her home before going to a location where "the defendant routinely sold narcotics."
Barton confirmed the sentences offered in both the July 13 and July 21 plea offers were the same: a 10-year term to wrap up all of Glover's cases.
Glover reiterated Monday he never sent or picked up anything illegal from Taylor's apartment.
"Everything they're presenting, they're trying to cover up what they done," he said.
Crump, in his statement, added that it's "enormously ironic" that "the accused drug dealer ... acted with honor, refusing to falsely discredit Bre after her death — even when offered the temptation of no prison time for lying, while prosecutors and police acted in the most egregiously dishonest and dishonorable way possible."
Taylor's death has sparked more than three months of protests and civil unrest in Louisville. It has gained national attention from civil rights groups and celebrities.
When officers broke down her door Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired one "warning" shot, he told police after the incident. He said in a subsequent police interview he did not realize it was police trying to enter the apartment.
Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, who was struck in the femoral artery in his left leg, and two other officers — detectives Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove — returned fire, hitting Taylor five times and killing her in the hallway.
Hankison has since been fired, while Mattingly and Cosgrove remain on administrative reassignment.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron and the FBI have opened independent investigations into the incident and are to determine whether criminal charges should be filed.
Phillip M. Bailey: pbailey@USAToday.com; 502-582-4475; Twitter: @phillipmbailey.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello.
Jamarcus Glover
$$$
