'We won't stop'
Loosemore, Bailey; Tobin, Ben
07 June 2020
"I feel like it's empowering and it's just going to keep growing stronger and stronger every day."
Bryana Hodge
Said she joined the prayer walk because she shares Taylor's name and is just a year younger than the ER technician was when she died
A sea of blue, white and silver balloons formed outside Metro Hall this weekend as hundreds gathered to honor the life of Breonna Taylor — an unarmed black woman who was fatally shot by Louisville police in March.For 10 days, the city building and a nearby park have been home to protests in the names of Taylor and David McAtee, a restaurant owner who was killed by authorities on June 1.
On Saturday, people from across Louisville suffered through the sweltering heat to listen to speakers, bow their heads in prayer and call for justice in the deaths of Taylor and McAtee.
"We are tired of being sick and tired," Sadiqa Reynolds, president and CEO of the Louisville Urban League, told the crowd. "We know police know how to police, because they do it differently in white communities.
"Breonna is gone. But she will never be forgotten."
Through the afternoon, protesters met separately at Waterfront Park and at 26th and Broadway, where McAtee was killed, before joining a larger crowd at Metro Hall.
Cherrie Vaughn, 42, helped organize one of the gatherings: A prayer walk that took more than 100 people from the West End into downtown.
Vaughn said God called upon her to pray for the community. And for the past five days, she's met with friends to pray in the parking lot of a Kroger, less than a block from the building where McAtee died.
The group will continue meeting there, Vaughn said, until there's substantive change.
"People are not locked up. And so we won't stop," she said, referencing the Louisville Metro Police officers who shot Taylor.
"I just believe that if we keep praying and trusting God, things have to change."
Before beginning the walk, religious leaders led the group in prayer, and Lafayette Cowden IV played a drum with his hands, as the crowd called out the names of people who have been killed by police.
Bryana Hodge, 25, said she joined the prayer walk because she shares Taylor's name and she's just a year younger than the ER technician was when she died.
"I definite just want to show my face," Hodge said, "show she's not the only Breonna."
Carrying a sign that read "Do I look scary to you?" Hodge said she's never been more proud to be a black American and to see all the support the protests have received, including from people of all ages and races.
"It still means a lot, hearing and seeing it from everyone else, like we're not alone," Hodge said.
"I feel like it's empowering and it's just going to keep growing stronger and stronger every day."
Louisville's movement has gained national attention from celebrities and politicians including Beyoncé, Oprah and Joe Biden since the protests began.
And on Saturday, civil rights leader the Rev. Jesse Jackson arrived in the city to speak about race and injustice against black citizens.
Jackson was greeted at the Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport by Mayor Greg Fischer before traveling to Metro Hall, where he led a call and response of the names of people who have been killed by police.
Just after 6 p.m., he remained in the crowd as the balloons were released, floating into the downtown sky to the sound of cheers.
"I feel like it's empowering and it's just going to keep growing stronger and stronger every day."
Bryana Hodge
Said she joined the prayer walk because she shares Taylor's name and is just a year younger than the ER technician was when she died
"People are not locked up. And so we won't stop. I just believe that if we keep praying and trusting God, things have to change."
Cherrie Vaughn
Helped organize the prayer walk that took more than 100 people
from the West End into downtown
The Rev. Jesse Jackson talks about the Breonna Taylor case and need for immediate change in policing matters as Mayor Greg Fischer listens Saturday at the Louisville airport.
$$$
