Police not the core problem causing racism
Jones, Ricky L.
07 June 2020
As my hometown of Atlanta exploded last week, a reporter opined, "These people are not peaceful. They are angry. They're out for revenge!" The same was true in Louisville, my adopted home, which suffered multiple shootings, a death, a fired police chief and an embattled mayor as a result of uprisings.
Tense and sometimes deadly confrontations between citizens and police are at the forefront of raging nationwide chaos. In Washington, D.C., protesters screamed at law enforcement officers outside the White House, "Who are you protecting?!" Some now seek to paper over the images of such fiery faceoffs with sparse, but soothing footage of tender moments in which police and protesters embrace, kneel and march together as the country struggles for calm.
Juxtapositions of those seeming contradictions are interesting. They actually highlight the fact that citizens and police are both pawns in a larger game orchestrated by many (not all) American elites who are cocooned from the consequences of such conflicts just as much as they are perennially socially distanced from commoners, coronavirus or not.
"Who are you protecting?" is a poignant question. If one drills down even a little, we understand police are actually not the core problem despite the fact that some of their behavior is reprehensible. They are simply another underpaid, mis-socialized tool used to protect a complex structure resting on a foundation of white supremacy. Though their exploitation is not equivalent by any measure, they are also used just as black people are.
Once that realization is understood and digested, at least on some basic level, police and citizens can stop persecuting one another and begin building a better world together. (Important note: I am not including the dyed-in-the-wool racist officers who use the badge to enact their viciousness in this analysis.)
Such an epiphany would mark a major paradigm shift and move us beyond the willfully ignorant, historically uniformed and intellectually lazy focus on "out-of-control" protester responses rather than the horrors that birthed them.
Be clear, what we are now witnessing is a rank and jarring, but understandable evolution of resistance tactics prompted by citizens reasonably concluding the dominant system no longer responds to "peaceful" protest. Consider the case of Colin Kaepernick for proof of that fact.
Admittedly, it isn't pretty when "No justice, no peace" becomes more than just a chant. But how long did we really think people were going to march around singing "We Shall Overcome" and do nothing else after witnessing dehumanization and death with few consequences? There is a bill that comes due for that and America is now paying it.
This was predictable for those who pay attention. As President John F. Kennedy warned in 1962, "Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable."
When mayhem seizes the day, a scramble ensues for the precious calm taken for granted by many who previously watched suffering people pushed to the edge without budging or caring. Scornful whites still continuously condemn on multiple levels. Respectful black shills are deployed to call for "peace" bellowing, "the message gets lost when violence happens."
They all are too late and miss the point. The game is changing at a speed they seemingly cannot comprehend.
Critics lament, "These violent protests aren't about George Floyd et al." In a sense, they are correct. The uprisings are about so much more. Floyd in Minnesota, Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia and Breonna Taylor in Kentucky were just the proverbial straws that broke the camel's back... for the moment.
Cities in the United States are degenerating into war zones with citizens openly confronting agents of the state, because people have lost faith in American institutions dominated by a nasty strand of oligarchs, plutocrats and supremacists. It is difficult for these overlords of a country founded upon and rooted in violence to claim moral authority in calling for peaceful responses to the psychic and physical violence they impose on others. It is a fundamental and increasingly untenable contradiction.
The ruling class, their acolytes and enforcers have been continuously warned. Arrogantly, they refused to listen. This is the result.
To be sure, black people have long been the most targeted prey in this system and, therefore, the ones who have cried out the loudest and longest for change. Others, specifically young white brothers and sisters, are now partnering with them as the persecution has become increasingly blatant and too much to ignore. What if police joined in real and meaningful ways as well?
At the end of the day, America's social, political and economic model, based on stark inequality, racial exploitation, domination and disregard is no longer sustainable. Old pacifications, narratives and justifications will no longer work. The time is long overdue for America to stop talking about racially evolving and actually do it.
Of course, protests of this sort have a shelf life and will end soon. In the aftermath, from policing to politics, nowhere is it written that our nation will truly change as a result of the current carnage. America will probably hold true to form and simply work to get past this moment with platitudes, empty clichés and endeavor to maintain the fundamental white-dominated power dynamics that got us to this point in the first place. If that is the choice, we'll be right back here again — and the next time may be worse.
$$$
