McGrath aims to unify Democrats
Watkins, Morgan; Kenning, Chris
01 July 2020
Now that U.S. Senate candidate Amy McGrath has won a tough primary race against state Rep. Charles Booker, she'll have to work to unify Kentucky Democrats if she wants a real shot at unseating Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell this fall.
McGrath earned 45.4% of the vote compared with Booker's 42.6%, according to the election results released Tuesday.
She emerged early as the front-runner in the race to win the Democratic Party's U.S. Senate nomination in Kentucky, but Booker mounted an unexpectedly competitive challenge by running as an unapologetically progressive candidate.
McGrath generally has been seen as a more moderate Democrat, although McConnell's campaign calls her "Extreme Amy McGrath" and contends that she's a far-left candidate.
On Tuesday, McGrath made it clear that she knows she needs to win over liberal voters who preferred Booker and his more progressive policies.
"There is no doubt that Charles (Booker) tapped into and amplified the energy and anger of so many who are fed-up with the status quo and are rightfully demanding long overdue action and accountability from our government and institutions," McGrath said in a statement.
"... But there can be no removal of Mitch McConnell without unity. We must unify our Democratic family to make that happen, including those who didn't vote for me in the primary, and I intend, immediately, to start the dialogue necessary to bring us all together in our common cause for the general election," she said. "The differences that separate Democrats are nothing compared to the chasm that exists between us and the politics and actions of Mitch McConnell. He's destroyed our institutions for far too long."
Booker conceded the race to McGrath late Tuesday afternoon and said he accepts the election results, although he noted that his campaign heard from people across Kentucky who had trouble with the voting process.
"As a poor black kid growing up in the West End of Louisville, I spent a lot of my life feeling alone and invisible. I don't feel alone anymore," he said in a statement. "We've proven you don't have to pretend to be a Republican to run as a Democrat in Kentucky, and that people want big, bold solutions to the enormous crises our state is facing ..."
"We went from being down 50 points in the polls to falling just short of a tie," he said. "While I'm disappointed, I'm so proud of us, and I'm still hopeful."
Booker indicated he's still dedicated to the work of beating McConnell, although he stopped short of officially endorsing McGrath.
"We're not going anywhere, and we'll have more news on the future of our movement in the coming days," he said. "From this moment on, let's take the frustration we feel and commit to fighting for change like never before."
McGrath had a huge edge over Booker in terms of finances, having attracted over $41 million in campaign contributions as of early June. (That's more money than McConnell, himself a renowned fundraiser, had drummed up for his reelection bid by that point.)
She also had been in the race longer, launching her campaign about six months earlier than Booker, and secured the support of the powerful Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer.
However, Booker's participation in recent protests against police brutality and racism in his hometown of Louisville catapulted him into the national spotlight and led to a sudden spike in support for his candidacy among people within and outside of Kentucky.
The protests Booker joined have focused heavily on Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who died after Louisville police officers shot her in her own home in March. Taylor's case brought a lot of attention to the city and, by extension, to Booker and the calls for justice he made in solidarity with other protesters.
In the final month of the primary race, Booker racked up endorsements from congressional superstars like U.S. Sens. Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, a flood of campaign donations and big social media buzz.
He also maintained his focus on grassroots work — a strategy he championed when he launched his candidacy in January — and held a series of outdoor campaign events around Kentucky to meet voters and get them fired up for Election Day.
Meanwhile, McGrath also made public appearances during the last week of the race but didn't host in-person events because of public health concerns about COVID-19.
Even though the primary election was held on June 23, there was a delay in announcing the full results because hundreds of thousands of Kentuckians mailed in their ballots, following procedural changes enacted because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Booker ended up winning over 35,000 more votes in Jefferson County — the most populous of Kentucky's 120 counties — than McGrath did, but it wasn't enough to boost him to victory.
He also beat McGrath in the state's second-biggest county, Fayette, though the roughly 3,500-vote margin wasn't as wide. Plus, McGrath performed well in more rural areas.
Retired Marine Mike Broihier, another key candidate in the crowded primary, took third place with 5% of the statewide vote, and he was quick to echo McGrath's call for unity.
"One year ago, my wife Lynn and I set out on a mission to defeat Mitch McConnell and save our Republic. That incredible journey will continue," he tweeted. "We're calling on the whole #BroihierBrigade to unite behind (McGrath) and fight to defeat Mitch in November."
Even though Booker lost, his campaign changed the narrative around Kentucky's Senate race in ways that likely will have an impact beyond the primary.
Raoul Cunningham, president of the Louisville NAACP, said Booker's rise amid Black Lives Matter protests helped elevate important issues of equity.
"His candidacy was very meaningful. He ran a much closer race than anyone could have anticipated this time last month, which bodes well for the issues that are important to the African American community," Cunningham said.
He suggested Booker's focus on racial justice means McGrath may adjust her positions on issues like police reform and said the primary highlighted "the importance of African American voters" ahead of the November election.
Christopher 2X, who heads the community education and anti-violence group Game Changers in Louisville, said Booker encouraged people to vote as they saw him gain traction by articulating issues of racial justice.
"He's a Black male, he's from West Louisville, and he's been felt in circles that would not have felt him before," he said. "For all the young individuals and others who put their energy in wanting to see Charles' voice heard — the way it's been heard in the last several weeks, they didn't waste their time."
Now that McGrath is officially the Democratic nominee, she can fully focus on trying to end McConnell's 35-year Senate career this fall.
McConnell's camp was quick to welcome her to the arena Tuesday.
"Extreme Amy McGrath is lucky to have gotten out of the primary with a victory, but her reputation sustained significant damage all across Kentucky," Kate Cooksey, a spokeswoman for McConnell's campaign, said in a statement.
"McGrath is just another tool of the Washington Democratic establishment who has no idea what matters most to Kentuckians," she said. "Amy, it's great to have you."
In her own statement Tuesday, McGrath indicated she's ready to duke it out with Kentucky's powerful Republican senator.
"I'm humbled that Kentucky Democrats have nominated me to take on Mitch McConnell in the general election and can't wait to get started in sending him into retirement and finally draining the toxic Washington political swamp that he built," she said.
$$$
