The unwitting leader of BLM in Louisville
26 July 2020
"Black liberation
[is] a
duty ...
it's not something you pick
up on the weekends."
Chanelle Helm
Chanelle Helm sits at a kitchen counter, laptop open, searching YouTube.
Just 24 hours ago, she was standing on the Clark Memorial Bridge with dozens of activists, blocking traffic as they hung a massive banner across two of its beams.
She wants to find a video that will let her be in that moment again — before she and 42 others were arrested during their demonstration, before the banner was removed by police, while Breonna Taylor's face still shown brightly over the Ohio River.
"They tried to bury me," the banner said. "They didn't know I was a seed."
Helm, 40, is an organizer with Black Lives Matter Louisville, part of a national network that launched in the wake of Michael Brown's death in Ferguson, Missouri.
Brown, an unarmed teenager, was shot and killed during a 90-second encounter with a police officer in 2014. His death drew international attention and sparked weeks of protests in the suburb of St. Louis.
Helm helped found the Louisville chapter in 2016 and has since become recognized as its leader.
She says she never set out to become the face of the group.
But other members undeniably look to her for guidance — and she's always the one tapped to talk to media.
"There's a ton of us," Helm said of the local chapter. "People just see me, and that's frustrating.
"A lot of our organizers are teachers, social workers and therapists. ... There are over 300 people in Louisville that pick up this work and push wherever they're at."
Helm grew up in Indianapolis and Louisville, raised mostly by her grandmother, a social worker, because her mom suffered from mental illness.
She believes Black communities can function better if they're given opportunities to make decisions for themselves — instead of being fed solutions by people outside their neighborhoods.
And she's tired of making concessions for people who are uncomfortable with her ideas.
"That's what I love about the movement part, because we're going to transform in this work," she said.
Helm has clashed recently with other local organizers who've asked the Black Lives Matter group to be more transparent in how it spends the donations it receives.
But the chapter is not a nonprofit, its members say, and is not required to release financial information.
The Black Lives Matter movement is purposefully careful about what information it makes public because it does not want members to become targets of law enforcement or other people who might harm them, member Shawnte West said at a mid-July press conference.
And "the transparency that people are asking for is demonstrated by how people continue to seek us out to stand with them and for them in their darkest hours," she said.
Helm said she embraces accountability — and she doesn't want racial justice work to become a competition.
"This work is to make sure that Black lives are supported and Black lives can fight back against oppressive governments," she said.
"There are a lot of highs and lows because you're fighting for something that a lot of people, particularly Black people, know may not be tangible in their lifetime," Helm added.
But organizers keep going, she said, because they feel a responsibility to the ancestors who came before them and the children who will come after.
"I think what people don't understand about Black liberation is it's a duty," Helm said. "It's not a cause, it's not something you pick up on the weekends. It is something that you've really got to feel in your heart."
As long as there continue to be seeds like Breonna, Helm and other organizers say they will always be there to help the movement for justice grow.
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courierjournal.com/baileyl.
"Black liberation
[is] a
duty ...
it's not something you pick
up on the weekends."
Chanelle Helm
Protesters rally May 28 in the intersection of Sixth and Jefferson streets in downtown Louisville in the wake of the shooting of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police. Organizers have continued to rally crowd in the city.
$$$
