McCoughtry among pros supporting Breonna Taylor
Aulbach, Lucas
23 July 2020
Breonna Taylor has been a key name off the court as professional basketball leagues prepare to return to action this month, and she'll have a place on it as well — former University of Louisville women's basketball standout Angel McCoughtry, for instance, will wear Taylor's name on the back of her jersey.
McCoughtry is one of many WNBA and NBA players who have called for action this week in the case of Taylor, who was shot and killed by Louisville Metro Police officers executing a no-knock search warrant at her apartment in March.
McCoughtry's followed the case for months. She attended Louisville at the same time as current Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron and was the first to suggest that the WNBA do something to honor Taylor this season, and the league listened — Taylor's name will be on the backs of players' jerseys when play resumes this weekend in Bradenton, Florida.
"It really has affected everyone a lot because of the fact that there's been no punishment," McCoughtry told The Athletic earlier this month. The way the story went, you don't just shoot up somebody's house. ... That's not right and justice needs to be served."
McCoughtry isn't the only one speaking out.
NBA players won't be allowed to put Taylor's name or the names of other Black Americans who have been killed by police on the backs of their jerseys — they can include some pre-approved messages in support of social justice causes, but names beyond that of the player won't be used. Still, several players who have arrived in Orlando have made their feelings about the case known.
Take Philadelphia 76ers forward Tobias Harris, for instance.
"We want to make sure that Daniel Cameron will arrest the cops and the officers involved with Breonna Taylor's death, and that's all I got to say," Harris said at the start of his media availability on Monday. "That's going to be my answer for every question."
Harris' press conference, according to NBA Sports Philadelphia, lasted 59 seconds and was amplified by LeBron James, Chris Paul and others.
Jerami Grant of the Denver Nuggets took a similar tone last week, putting the focus during his interviews on Taylor, and the fact that the three officers who entered her apartment the night of her death have not faced charges. And Jaylen Brown of the Boston Celtics issued a lengthy statement of his own on Saturday, ending a press conference by calling for systematic changes to the way police operate.
"Breonna Taylor is an example of a Black life who was taken because of how the system has been laid out," Brown said, according to the Boston Globe. "And we're going to continue to protest and continue to feel some type of way about it. It's unfortunate, but I think these conversations need to continue to be had."
WNBA play begins Saturday, while the NBA will resume its season starting on July 30. Both leagues are playing in isolated "bubbles," where athletes, coaches and other personnel will be tested regularly for COVID-19 and will be cut off from much of the outside world.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Angel McCoughtry instructs USA Basketball Women's National Team teammates during practice in January.
$$$
