A place to call home
Aulbach, Lucas
13 July 2020
Philip Plybon was first in line Sunday afternoon at Lynn Family Stadium.
He had his mask on, which was a requirement to enter the first Louisville City FC game at the brand-new Butchertown open-air soccer arena, and stood 6 feet away from the woman behind him.
A 73-year-old cancer survivor, Plybon took the guidelines to prevent the spread of the coronavirus seriously. He'd stay away from others once he was inside, he said, and planned to follow all the rules Louisville City FC and stadium officials put in place as nearly 5,000 people of all ages packed the stands for the first live sporting event in the city since March.
He wouldn't miss it.
He plans to be in the infield at Churchill Downs in September for his first Kentucky Derby, too. But Sunday, he said, was an opportunity too good to pass up — he's "sports crazy," he acknowledged, and COVID-19 wasn't going to stop him from watching the first game at the $65 million Lynn Family Stadium.
"This is totally a jewel in the crown of Louisville," Plybon said.
Sunday's game marked a new era in soccer in a city that's been defined for decades by horse racing and college basketball.
The beautiful game has built a foothold in the region over the past five years, since Louisville City FC played its first match in 2015. By next year, the team will share its new open-air arena with Racing Louisville FC, a National Women's Soccer League expansion franchise coming in 2021.
Lynn Family Stadium was built to be the home of soccer in Louisville, and a home for its growing soccer fanbase — that massive "OUR CITY" sculpture facing Adams Street is for everybody. Sure, that statue's missing an "I," but the fans who formed a line to stand where the letter should have been took it upon themselves to complete the phrase.
Fans weren't the only ones to stand in the shadow of the sculpture.
Protesters from the ongoing Breonna Taylor demonstrations also made their way to Sunday's game.
More than 100 stood outside the stadium before the pitch, dressed in black to contrast the purple in the crowd and carrying signs calling for action against the police officers involved in the March shooting of the Black Louisville ER technician.
Players knelt inside the stadium before the game to show support for the movement, and a 15-second moment of silence was held before the game.
The chants of the protesters mixed with the drums the Coopers played inside the stadium. Herman Quinn Jr. stood with his sticks at one of the drums — for years he's played with the Coopers, the team's independent supporter group, and he didn't think twice about renewing his season ticket amid the pandemic. He'd spent years waiting for Sunday.
"We've been waiting on this moment for about five years and it's finally here," Quinn said. "We're ready. It's a place that we can call home. We can actually call it home and believe that our club is here to stay forever."
Julie Embry stood behind Plybon in line, like Quinn, has been a Louisville City FC fans since the team took the field for the first time at Louisville Slugger Field in 2015. There was no concern, she said, when team officials asked her if she wanted to renew her season tickets amid the pandemic. She paid attention to the safety guidelines in place and was confident the organization and fans alike would take them seriously.
"We've watched their front office for a long time and they are very conscientious," she said, the purple streamers in her hair blowing with the wind. "I have every confidence that they've taken every measure possible or I wouldn't be here."
Announced attendance was a socially distanced 4,850, with tape pulled across seats that were unavailable and floor markers in lines every 6 feet to indicate proper distance between household units.
Hand sanitizer was for sale for $3.95 and available for free at 40 dispensers throughout the stadium, though several facility officials questioned how often they had been used by fans (at around 4:30 p.m., one worker said, the dispense he had been watching had been used twice, and one of those times was by a stadium employee).
Cody Alexander was hired by Ahead Resources to tackle one job and one job only — keeping Lynn Family Stadium sanitary. He said he'd seen most fans adhering to the mask mandate as he wiped down a trash can before the game, but questioned how crowded areas like lines and concourses could keep people 6 feet apart.
"I'm a little bit concerned about how we're going to be able to keep our distance from each other," he said. "... As you can see, people walking by are close to each other and passing people up."
It wasn't a perfect plan, or the perfect ending to the game — Louisville City FC fell to Pittsburgh Riverhounds SC by a score of 3-1. But for some fans, like Seamus Galligan, the chance was too much to pass up to get back in a stadium and watch a game — and, for the first time in months, get a little taste of normalcy.
That taste, he said minutes before the match began, was worth wearing a mask for a couple hours.
"It protects you and it protects other people as well," Galligan said. "It's just a bit of respect on either side."
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649.
MORE INSIDE: Read about Louisville FC's game, 1B
Fans wear masks and socially distance during Sunday's LouCity FC game against Pittsburgh Riverhounds SC.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
A caravan of BLM supporters marched along East Witherspoon Street on Sunday afternoon to protest at Lynn Family Stadium's opening day.
Marty Pearl/Special to Courier Journal
$$$
