'We can't be silent'
Aulbach, Lucas
12 Aug 2020
The latest edition of O, The Oprah Magazine, is flying off the shelves in Louisville — it was already sold out at Carmichael's Bookstore and Barnes & Noble by Tuesday afternoon.
There's a reason it's such a hot seller in Louisville. Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman killed by police in March in an incident that set off protests in the city and around the nation, is on the cover, marking the first time in the magazine's 20-year history that Oprah Winfrey has not been featured on the front. Stories about Taylor and the movement that has emerged following her death fill many of the publication's 100-plus pages.
Representatives from both Barnes & Noble and Carmichael's Bookstore said they hoped to pick up more copies later this week.
Here's a quick look at what's inside:
The cover Let's start with what you see before you open the magazine. The cover features an illustration by Alexis Franklin, a 24-year-old digital artist who said she was struck by Taylor's death.
The illustration is based on a widely distributed photo of Taylor wearing a Louisville EMS shirt — you may have seen it on one of 26 billboards that have been put up around the city in recent days. Franklin wrote that she put the image together on her iPad and Photoshop.
"So many things were going through my mind — Breonna's life, mostly, and how it ended so abruptly and unnecessarily. Every stroke was building a person: each eyelash, each wisp of hair, the shine on her lips, the highlight on her cheek," Franklin wrote. "... I felt a new level of determination and pressure to get it right, but I tried not to let that affect me."
89 names One page in the magazine is devoted entirely to an illustration of 89 names shown inside the silhouette of a woman's head. The names are those belonging to 89 Black women, transgender women and girls who have been killed by police or died while in police custody, the magazine said, using a list kept by the African American Policy Forum's #SayHerName campaign.
Hard white truths Six pages in the magazine are dedicated to white Oprah Magazine readers who answered a prompt asking when they were most aware of their white privilege and what they were doing to dismantle the status quo.
Indianapolis' Jennifer Jones, 43, wrote about how attending an event at Purdue University's Black Cultural Center that was attended by an overwhelmingly Black audience made her realize "my own privilege of being a part of the dominant culture."
'She was just like me' The final page of the magazine is a narrative written by Winfrey, the massively influential talk show host and philanthropist who launched the Oprah Magazine in 2000.
Winfrey wrote about a discussion she had with Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer. Her piece gives Palmer's point of view from the night of her daughter's death, from the phone call she received informing her that Taylor had been shot to her trip to Taylor's apartment that night, where she was turned away and not allowed inside.
Taylor's life and death resonated with Winfrey, she wrote. Winfrey has spent the past five months quarantining with two 26-year-old women from her school in South Africa, she said, and she thinks of Taylor when she sees her "daughter-girls."
Taylor's story, Winfrey concluded, should resonate with others as well.
"What I know for sure: We can't be silent. We have to use whatever megaphone we have to cry for justice," Winfrey wrote. "And that is why Breonna Taylor is on the cover of O magazine. I cry for justice in her name.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
$$$
