The world is their canvas
McDonogh, Pat
05 July 2020
Graffiti is the art world's middle finger, an active show of defiance for authority. The artists behind the sprawling script or bold pictures thrill in seeing their work, large and shocking, a poke in the eye on your morning commute.
Over the past year, I sat down with four prolific graffiti artists in Louisville who shared stories of how they became part of the underground graffiti world. Each artist discussed the thrill of the tag and the pitfalls of this secretive world — drugs, depression, even death. There is an aging out process, nothing lasts forever. But while it does, it's a therapy session in a squirt can.
They paint as a means of self-expression, as a form of therapy in a confusing world. The world is their canvas.
A painted piece may last less than 24 hours or for years, depending on its location. The more secluded the spot, the better its chance for survival, creating a gallery of the unseen across Louisville's landscape.
Some have empathy for the owners whose property they vandalize. But it's all about the thrill of the "forbidden art."
Graffiti has been in the news lately as numerous landmarks and buildings across the country have been defaced during recent protests and riots calling for justice following the deaths of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor at the hands of police.
But this is not that story. This is the story of the people behind the graffiti that has long been painted on buildings, under overpasses and on train cars across Louisville. This is a story of their art.
By writing these profiles, neither The Courier Journal nor I condone their acts of vandalism. I don't know their real names, where they grew up or the schools they attended. I'm merely interested in who they are and why they write on walls.
'It's not just out of respect. It's out of love' It's a long way down a steep embankment to the concrete supports of a bridge over a rustic creek. The mud grows worse as we sidestep the softer patches and a thicket of young trees. There, painted large on the side of the viaduct wall was his tag, "DEVO."
Proud of his artwork, he is excited to see it once again, but disappointed that floodwaters had left it streaked with mud.
"My buddy got me into writing graffiti," DEVO, 23, told me. "We were both new to our middle school. He was drawing in his notebook and I walked up to him and said, 'Dude, that is awesome. Can you show me how to do this?' It was different and nobody else was doing it. I saw it as a way to express myself. I haven't stopped since the seventh grade, and I'm going to keep doing it."
His tagging name, DEVO, is short for devotion. It stands for devotion to the tagger's lifestyle, and to his art. It also means devotion to friends and family who have died. To his recently deceased grandmother — "I wasn't able to attend her funeral" — and devotion to fellow Louisville graffiti writers LEMEN and RELO, who died of drug overdoses.
Mostly, he paints in devotion to his younger brother who followed him into the lifestyle. "I told my brother not to do it because I knew it was going to cause trouble for him," he said.
His brother, who tagged under the name FAEGO, died from a heroin overdose in 2016 at age 17.
"I was the last one to talk to him. He called me the night he died and just wanted to hang out, but I had other plans. He told me he loved me," DEVO said.
He carries the painful memory of his brother's death with him each day, with each tag.
"I always throw up his dates, 1998-2016 in my work. Every piece I do, I write his name next to it," he said.
"It's not just out of respect, it's out of love. He's my best friend. If you lose a best friend, it's hard to adapt to life again. I just want to keep his name alive forever no matter what, till I'm gone."
In the world of graffiti artists, drugs often play a large part, he said. "A lot of them have depression, anxiety. Drugs are (a) way ... to escape from it. For me, graffiti takes all that depression and anxiety away without medication. It makes me feel great to know that I just did something I love."
And while adrenaline is there, "I also get a paranoia rush," he said. "It's a feeling that when you're done with it and get away with it, you just feel great. ... I'll go crazy with it sometimes, but not to the point where I'm destroying someone's business."
DEVO paints most of his work in less-traveled places.
"Not a lot of people see my work unless you are an urban explorer. I try not to get caught, that's why I paint under bridges, in tunnels, viaducts and in the woods. What's wrong with painting something under a bridge?"
He told me he's never been arrested for writing graffiti, but "back in the day, I hid in the woods from two cops for hours and we had to find our way back," DEVO said. "I've gotten away every time I've been chased. I'm smart about it because I don't want to be caught. I don't want to go to jail. I don't have the money for all that."
Defiance is at the core of DEVO's artwork, he told me.
"Some people want it out of the neighborhood because they think it looks trashy. Some people think it looks great. It makes me happy when I see it because somebody is saying 'screw the government, I can do whatever I want, and you can't control me,'" he said.
'Family Stays True' I met AEMO in west Louisville, but a train blocks us from the graffiti he wants me to see. So we head north, but its daytime and the factory he's tagged is alive with workers.
Instead, we drive to Old Louisville where the back of a tire distributor is tagged with the words "Family Stays True," in massive 10-foot letters.
"'Family Stays True' was one of the first things I did as a part of a crew of people that I looked up to for many years. It was cool that I was a part of it and it's been so prominent in my life," AEMO, 25, told me.
"I was always fascinated with the questions posed by graffiti. I'd see it and wonder how did someone climb up there and paint something that detailed with spray paint. Graffiti writers TITAN and 2BUCK were my inspirations. Those guys took me under their wing and showed me the right and wrong ways to do things."
AEMO compares graffiti to advertising and the need to be seen.
"The Heavy Hitter, (attorney Darryl Isaacs) has billboards all over the place. I'm not a lawyer, but I want to see my name on a billboard. What's stopping me from climbing the ladder and putting my own name up there?"
And climb he does.
"I find working in elevated places to be the most fun and I think those spots tend to pose more questions. I also enjoy painting where creeks go under highways. I've got a pair of waders and I go walk a creek and sometimes I'll bring a fishing pole, some beers, some friends, even a dog."
Like other artists, AEMO seeks the adrenaline rush. "I've definitely put my life in danger. There are certain spots where I go in knowing I have to be on my toes, shimmying on an I-beam for instance, above a highway. I don't think the fall from a highway sign would kill me, but the semi-truck coming after the fall would. That adrenaline rush keeps me coming back."
The therapeutic aspect of tagging is what keeps him alive while he does it.
"Graffiti to me is having an outlet to free my mind and be completely away from all the nonsense that's going on. Just disappear for a couple of hours and work," he said.
AEMO took art classes throughout high school "but wasn't ever into it. I was rebellious. I'm currently on a full-ride scholarship to an art school and I'm incorporating what I've learned in graffiti into my art to create something new. Some people choose oil and paint landscapes. I choose spray paint and letters. The opportunities are endless."
And while he tags for the adrenaline and therapy it provides him as an artist, he realizes there are consequences.
"Everybody goes through this internal battle, is this the right thing to be doing? Certain spots, like the back of a building, gets painted and it sits by the railroad tracks. Nobody sees it other than you or railroad workers. What difference does it really make?" he asks.
"I also see why somebody would be absolutely furious with someone who painted graffiti on their building. I see both sides but if I find a cool spot ... well, sorry."
'It helps me work out a lot of problems' He waits by a big box wall near Jefferson Mall, the kind of place where his dramatic, colorful paintings would blur the beige out of suburbia.
He may be the quietest of the taggers I've met in Louisville. Tall and lanky, his shaggy hair sprouts from beneath his ball cap.
"Growing up I would walk the train tracks to school and there were graffiti spots on the way. I'd see all these really nice pieces from the Original Gangsters of Louisville, guys who have been painting for 10-20 years. I wondered how they did it and how they got away with it. I started taking pictures of it and it grew from there," he told me.
ATRIG fits the pattern of graffiti artists I've met in Louisville. An artistically gifted but uninterested student, a sub-radar kid passing through the halls of the education factory.
"I didn't really do much in school, I passed, I scooted by, I just drew graffiti all day," he said.
He suffers from depression and calls graffiti therapeutic — and addictive.
"It helps me mentally work out a lot of problems. I could be doing drugs and bringing myself down, be on the other side of things, but this keeps me out of trouble."
Like many illegal activities, graffiti writing can be hazardous to your health.
"I had a gun pulled on me by a guy on meth at an abandoned house in St. Louis. It was completely boarded up and this truck pulls up. I see him hop out and pull a gun. I thought I'm not running and I'm not going to get shot. He says, 'this is my trap house, I'm selling drugs out of here!' I had to diffuse the whole situation," he said.
ATRIG recently had to "come clean" about this underground lifestyle to his family.
"I kept my secret to myself for a long time, but this past year I got jobs painting murals. My family was kind of wondering how I got so good at graffiti, so I had to tell them. They definitely don't want me destroying people's property," he said. "They'd rather I painted murals and canvases."
'I think it's important to risk your life once in a while' His dreadlocks bounce in the breeze as he bounds up the stairs to his apartment and plops down on a sofa as he takes me on a deep dive into his fascination with graffiti.
Forever etched in his mind is the night he hung over the roof of a 14-story building on Logan Street.
"I was a freshman in high school, about 14 or 15. We went all over Bardstown Road collecting roller paint from Sherwin Williams and out of people's garages. I'd been going to that building since I was 12 years old when an old graffiti writer took me there. My mom was out of town and I'm was supposed to be staying at someone's house, but I'm downtown on this roof instead," SOARE said.
"She begins calling and I've got my lie mapped out; 'I'm asleep, I didn't hear you calling.' I'm running my mouth, trying to act tired but, as I'm looking out over the city I'm thinking, 'wow this is only going to take me to weird places in life.'"
"My mom's still yelling at me, and I'm like, 'get off my back.' She's telling me she knows I'm not where I'm supposed to be, but I go back to working on it," he said.
That night, "we caught the bus at 11:40 pm. I remember watching it from the TARC bus, seeing my name on the building. It was really exciting," SOARE, 21, said.
SOARE, who also produces and sells studio art, said "we're not raised in a world to care about art. By the time I got into graffiti, I wanted to be an artist and my teachers would tell me, 'that's really nice, but figure out what you're going to do for money as well.'"
They were "just shooting me down in such a passive-aggressive way. I'm just now getting to a point where I'm believing in myself again. I can do this for a living, I am creative, I am good at art," he said. "People pay money for art. It still exists."
And while he sells his studio art, it's tagging that brings him the most joy.
"Tagging billboards is really therapeutic and the ultimate shock to your reality. The billboards never get old. There was a time when I did 10 billboards in 2017. I like to climb, I like high places, to be above highways, bridges, train tracks, anything," he said.
Like others, he often turns to graffiti when he's struggling.
"I was going through a time when I was getting so uncomfortable with myself at night, that I'd pull over on the highway and paint stuff along the way. A few times it really clicked in my head what I was doing. I was like, 'OK man, you're out here at 4:30 in the morning on the highway running around in your sweatpants.'"
It's that "high" that's most dangerous — and thrilling — for SOARE and other artists.
"Graffiti is a nasty thing, I've been caught painting over 10 times. It's very addictive and incredibly problematic. There are 40-year-old dudes breaking the law every day because of it," he said. "A lot of graffiti writers are bad off on drugs, but I've seen other situations where it keeps them sober. It's enough of a thrill where they don't feel the need to get high."
For SOARE, graffiti gives his life meaning.
"I think it's important to risk your life once in a while, so you appreciate things."
$$$
