Far-right militia plans Louisville 'boots on the ground' march
Tobin, Ben
24 July 2020
A far-right militia group is calling for members to come to Louisville on Saturday in response to a planned armed march by the NFAC (Not F***ing Around Coalition), a Black militia.
In a Facebook video posted on Tuesday, a user named Michael Malinconico said the Three Percenters militia will have "boots on the ground to assist and security on this situation."
"We are asking for an all call-out ... to assist in countering NFAC," Malinconico said.
And in the Facebook group Kentucky Security Force III%, the page shared a video on Wednesday from the national III% Security Force group of a man criticizing the NFAC. Above the shared video, the post reads, "See you Saturday."
It's unclear what the Kentucky Three Percenters plan to do on Saturday or how many people will arrive in Louisville.
Patsy Bush, the state secretary of the Kentucky 3 Percenters, declined to comment, saying "I'm not at liberty to speak about it at this point."
The Three Percenter posts come after John Fitzgerald "Jay" Johnson, the self-proclaimed grand master and founder of the NFAC, announced in a video posted on Sunday that the group plans to gather in an armed formation Saturday to demand justice for Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman who was fatally shot by police.
"Understand the seriousness of this situation," said Johnson, who goes by the name The Real Grandmaster Jay.
"Breonna Taylor was murdered in her home. ... We gotta go in on this one."
The militia made waves July 4 when roughly 1,000 members marched in Stone Mountain, Georgia, where there is a mountainside carving of Confederate leaders Robert E. Lee, Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson.
Authorities said the event was peaceful, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Johnson told Louisville city leaders in a phone call last week that he conservatively estimates 5,000 to 6,000 members of the NFAC will show up in Louisville. The formation was originally set to meet at Central High School at noon, but police have confirmed that it will no longer be held there due to a restriction against weapons on school property.
According to Louisville Metro Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay, the group will meet at Baxter Square Park at Jefferson Street and 11th and 12th streets at noon. The group will then march downtown to Jefferson Square Park, Halladay said.
Johnson met electronically with Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron and Louisville Metro Council President David James on Monday, Cameron's spokeswoman Elizabeth Kuhn told The Courier Journal.
Cameron is investigating the killing of Taylor, who was unarmed in her South End apartment when Louisville police shot her before 1 a.m. March 13.
"The conversation was productive," Kuhn wrote in an email. "Attorney General Cameron discussed his continued commitment to moving forward with our office's independent and thorough investigation into the death of Ms. Taylor."
In an interview with The Courier Journal on Tuesday, Councilman James said he is "not a big fan of people carrying weapons while they're protesting or marching through the city, no matter who they are."
He added that the group has marched peacefully previously, and that he is more worried about counterprotesters and "one person that does one stupid thing, and then we have a problem."
The Three Percenters stirred controversy in late May when the local group's president, Terry Bush, hoisted an effigy of Gov. Andy Beshear from a tree at the Kentucky Capitol during a "Patriot Day 2nd Amendment Rally."
The militia also came to Louisville in July 2018 to hold a counterprotest against a group demonstrating against federal immigration policies.
The Three Percenters - Original Facebook page says it is a "national organization made up of patriotic citizens who love their country, their freedoms, and their liberty. We are committed to standing against and exposing corruption and injustice."
USA TODAY has previously reported that members of the group were involved in the violent protests following a deadly neo-Nazi rally in 2017 in Charlottesville, Virginia, and the national group issued a stand-down order in response to it. The Washington Post also reported the group took steps to disassociate itself from the racism at the rally.
Johnson, the leader of the NFAC, did not respond to a request for comment Thursday morning on the Three Percenters' plans.
In response to the demonstrations, Louisville police will heighten its presence in Jefferson Square Park and block off several roads downtown starting at 8 a.m. Saturday.
LMPD Maj. Aubrey Gregory said during a press briefing Thursday afternoon that the department is trying to provide safety for any group that is downtown Saturday.
Gregory said he has heard from counterprotester groups as far as Kansas, including the Mississippi Militia and Kentucky Militia on top of several Three Percenters groups, but he did not have an estimate on how many people may show up.
He added that several groups who had initially expressed interest now say they will not come.
To separate groups, Gregory said police will create what he calls a "no-go zone" on Fifth Street, keeping opposing demonstrators divided with bike racks.
"We're going to try and keep those people who have alternate viewpoints that are both are exercising their First Amendment to express those viewpoints, we're going to try and keep them separated on both sides of Fifth Street," Gregory said.
Meanwhile,when asked during a Tuesday press briefing if the state would send police to the NFAC gathering in Louisville, Beshear said his administration has not received a request to get involved.
On Thursday, Gregory said he has been keeping other agencies in the loop but has not asked for any additional assistance.
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or follow on Twitter @TobinBen. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
People wearing Three Percenters t-shirts and carrying guns stood guard as protesters left the Governor's Mansion – which was closed to the public – at a Patriot Day/2nd Amendment rally May 25 at the state capitol in Frankfort.
$$$
