Speaking up
Robinson, Cameron Teague
09 June 2020
Many of the conversations Louisville defensive coordinator Bryan Brown is having with his players are about much more than football. They are about life, he said.
He saves the first 15 or more minutes of his positional meetings to talk to them about the current protests going on in Louisville, and around the country, about racial inequality, their life experiences and more.
Even with the season three months away, he knows those conversations take precedent.
"You have to have these conversations with these young men because they are the next group to lead our country. They will lead into the next one, my son," said Brown. "It's very important to have those conversations. It's been awesome to hear these stories because they touch your heart. They make you mad and make you angry."
Some of those conversations have led to direct action from the football program.
As protesters took to downtown Louisville seeking justice for Breonna Taylor, an African American woman who was fatally shot by police in her apartment, the team had a team meeting on May 30.
The staff, which has focused on building a player-led program since it arrived in Louisville in December 2018, expressed its support of the players. Afterwards, redshirt junior cornerback Anthony Johnson wanted to do something.
He set up a group chat and got the ball rolling on a walk along the Big Four Bridge with players and the staff. On May 31, players and coaches took that walk. Even strength coach Mike Sirignano's son and running back coach Norval McKenzie's son were there.
There they walked and held signs that said, "We not the same," "Stop killing us" and "The Greatest Commandment, Love God, Love People."
Seeing Johnson and the players step up to put that together brought a sense of pride to Brown.
"It meant a lot being an African American. The things we've seen, what I've seen over my lifetime being from Mississippi and growing up in a place where it was a mixture but you still see some things and hear some things," Brown said. "Even playing sports you hear people calling you the N-word and things of that nature. It's tough for us as African Americans to go through that and sometimes we don't get the opportunities some people deserve because of the color of our skin and those guys understand it and they believe it and I know our coaches understand and believe it. That's why we are out for a change."
In response to the protests, Louisville has put an emphasis on not just speaking with their players, but allowing them to speak their minds. Instead of stifling the players, telling them to watch what they put on social media in the middle of nation-wide protests, Louisville has told its players to use their voices.
Many have done just that. Players like defensive end Dayna Kinnaird, wide receiver Dez Fitzpatrick, quarterback Micale Cunningham, linebacker C.J. Avery and many others have gone to Twitter to express their opinions.
And it's made Brown, a former player at Ole Miss, proud of his team.
"They have a platform to voice their opinion. I think their opinion matters, it does. It matters a lot. I think being an athlete in general, they have a voice," Brown said. "We told them to use the platform you have, use it. Use it to the best of your ability because you have a lot of followers and people looking up to you back home or wherever it may be. You may be able to reach that one person or two people that can change their view on African Americans as well as just minorities in general. Use your platform to the best of your ability and let god do the rest."
There are more events planned in the future for Louisville. Along with walk the bridge, multiple players joined former offensive lineman Jamon Brown with a cleanup mission downtown last week and the team is planning another service event this week.
As protests around the country enter their second week, the Cardinals plan to continue as well. Bryan Brown said the Cardinals will be out in the community throughout the summer, even if the protests end.
"That's one thing coach (Scott Satterfield) Satt said, we need to make sure we don't let this thing die, you know about racial diversity, racial tension and police brutality against people of color, we don't need to let it die down," Bryan Brown said. "We will continue this all summer and not just let it be a two-week thing."
Cardinals return to facilities for workouts When the COVID-19 pandemic shut down sports completely in March, the Louisville football team was just halfway through its 14-practice spring session.
It left for spring break hoping to return in a week but was kept out of the facilities until Monday, which was the first day the Cardinals could return for voluntary workouts. Still, only 30 players were allowed in.
So, how did Louisville pick which players returned?
It tried to get most of its first- and second-team players in first, but it also prioritized those who were hurt during the spring and needed to rehab.
"We went through a good bit of our starters and figured out who we needed to bring in the most important as far as their bodies and mentally and things of that nature," Bryan Brown said. "We focused on our first and second groups and ranked those guys from there and wanted to make sure we got some of the defensive line and some of the guys who were hurt that we needed to get in here asap so they can get treatment as well."
Across the positions, Bryan Brown said the numbers are fairly even. Breaking things down on defense, Bryan Brown said there were about three or four defensive linemen already working out, along with four corners and three safeties.
"It's a mix and match of a lot of guys," he said. "Didn't want to be eight defensive lineman vs. what we have. We wanted to spread it out even so we can make sure the next group is spread out as well."
The team still has restrictions. There is social distancing during workouts and coaches and players can't have physical contact with each other. Athletes are not allowed to shower at athletics facilities, and other moves such as designated entrances and exits and electronic daily symptom checks are also expected to be in place.
NCAA rules prevent coaches from attending voluntary offseason workouts, but coaches may be inside the facility. Though athletic director Vince Tyra said they will be allowed inside athletics facilities.
Satterfield is on board with the players returning to practice, even without being able to interact with them as normal.
"Everybody is anxious to get back and get going," Satterfield told the Courier Journal before the team resumed workouts. "Really like America. I think if you poll America I think everybody is ready to get back and going too. It's exciting to see how we are opening back up American and right here in Kentucky and Louisville. It's a lot of things we took for granted in the last two months so it's exciting to get back to a little bit of normalcy. It's going to be different we all know that. We all have to be cautious about how we approach it.
"Safety is our No. 1 priority. But we all know we have to get back to living life and doing the things we all know and we all love."
The next group of football players will return to the facilities on June 22, with the rest of the team set to be on campus by July 6, if everything goes as planned.
$$$
