Bridge blockade leads to 33 arrests
Aulbach, Lucas; Krauth, Olivia
30 June 2020
Protesters blocked all lanes of the Clark Memorial Bridge, which connects Louisville and Southern Indiana, for three and a half hours on Monday before it reopened ahead of rush hour.
The midday demonstration resulted in 33 arrests and 19 towed cars, according to Louisville Metro Police spokesman Lamont Washington, as officials pulled away several vehicles that had been used to bring traffic to a standstill.
A MetroSafe supervisor said the Louisville department was contacted by Indiana officials about the shutdown at 11:11 a.m. All southbound lanes of the Second Street Bridge – one of the only toll-free crossings for drivers over the Ohio River – were closed until 2:46 p.m., when they were able to reopen for traffic.
A livestream from the Black Lives Matter Louisville Facebook page showed the demonstrators were still in the streets at 12:10 p.m., as police appeared to be approaching.
The protesters set up signs in the street and hung up a banner on the bridge during the protest with an image of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman killed by Louisville police executing a no-knock warrant at her apartment in March. By 1 p.m., police had reached the protesters on the bridge and made 33 arrests after the crowd did not follow officers' order to disperse, Washington's statement said.
Tow trucks pulled vehicles from the scene, with at least half a dozen being taken away between 1:30 p.m. and 2 p.m. In total, 19 vehicles were towed, Washington said. Vans with arrested protesters were driven back into the city, with a group of demonstrators at the base of the bridge cheering to those in the cars and promising that they would get out of jail.
All of the protesters were believed to have been removed from the bridge around 2 p.m. Officers began leaving the scene 20 minutes later, as protesters moved from the street to the sidewalk after being warned that they would be arrested if they stayed. The bridge was reopened at 2:46 p.m, according to MetroSafe.
Most of those arrested, according to Metro Corrections' updating booking log, were charged with second-degree disorderly conduct and obstructing a highway.
The scene remained mostly tame, with no significant confrontations between protesters and police officers in the area as the two groups spoke at times.
At one point a Black officer addressed a group of protesters, saying the officers were on the scene to keep a small group of agitators under control and that the peaceful protesters were not a problem.
"We want the bad ones gone more than you do," he said, in reference to fellow police officers.
Meanwhile, protesters remained at Jefferson Square Park on Monday. Police were called to the scene at one point over a report of an attempted truck theft, but beyond that the mood remained relaxed for much of the afternoon.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: www.courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Shannyn White puts her fist into the air and kneels as police block off a group of protesters at the foot of the Second Street Bridge. Protesters on the bridge were arrested and cars were towed.
Photos by Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
A police officer holds a weapon as police block off protesters at the foot of the Second Street Bridge.
$$$
