Louisville braces for Derby protests
Aulbach, Lucas
03 Sep 2020
There won't be a crowd inside Churchill Downs on Saturday for the 2020 Kentucky Derby, but you can bet that there'll be one outside the iconic Louisville racetrack.
Protesters are expected to gather at South Central Park, less than a mile from the twin spires. The Not F***ing Around Coalition, a Black militia that brought hundreds to Louisville for a march in late July, will be in town as well. And there's a rally dubbed as a "patriotic event" planned for Saturday morning by an online personality known as "The Angry Viking" and his supporters.
Got all that? Louisville city officials said they've been in contact with several organizers and will be prepared for whatever the weekend brings.
"This is a challenging time," Mayor Greg Fischer said Wednesday. "We're using all the resources that we have to address the safety issues that Louisville is facing right now and we'll continue to do so today and tomorrow and in the days that come after that. We'll continue to use LMPD resources so that we can keep our city as safe as we possibly can."
Louisville Metro Police will be all over the city, according to Maj. Aubrey Gregory, along with Kentucky State Police troopers and members of the National Guard, who help with security at the Derby every year. Friday and Saturday are "All Work Days" for LMPD officers, as they are every year for Derby weekend, meaning all officers must be available to assist as needed.
Arrests will take place for acts including blocking traffic, vandalism and trespassing on private property, Fischer said.
Central Avenue will be closed between Third Street and Taylor Boulevard on Friday and Saturday, but no other roads will be closed completely, according to LMPD Lt. Arnold Rivera. Oakdale Avenue where Southern Parkway and Third Street meet will be limited to local access only, he said.
It's tough to predict what the crowd sizes will be. The NFAC brought hundreds to Louisville in July, and hundreds of protesters have attended a number of protests around the city in recent months.
Like many around the city, several social justice groups have had Sept. 5 circled on their calendars for months. With the bright spotlight of the annual horse race once again shining on Louisville this weekend, protesters are planning to make their voices heard.
The biggest planned demonstration is set for 4:30 p.m. Saturday at South Central Park on Colorado Avenue in the Taylor Berry neighborhood. That protest was organized by the Justice and Freedom Coalition, a local group working for greater accountability among police, and was joined by Until Freedom, a national social justice group that has put down roots in Louisville amid the summer protests.
Timothy Findlay, the pastor at the Kingdom Fellowship Christian Life Center on Broadway, started the Justice and Freedom Coalition. His group announced a boycott of the Derby in July and organized the protest alongside Until Freedom. He said the coalition also has partnered with the NFAC.
"Although there won't be fans in the stands, the eyes of the world will be on Churchill Downs. It feels like the perfect opportunity for us to make our voice heard and make our message clear that we're not OK with this. We're not celebrating. We're not feeling festive," Findlay said. "Just about every protest organization in this city and nationally are all on the same page."
The NFAC is also planning to make its second appearance in Louisville, as the group's leader, John "Grandmaster Jay" Johnson has said previously. Members of the group will be outside Churchill Downs on Saturday, Maj. Gregory said, and plan to stay in the city for four or five hours before leaving.
Meanwhile, a separate demonstration is planned Saturday morning by The Angry Viking, a pro-Second Amendment online figure with a large following. That group's plan is to meet at Cox Park at 8 a.m. and then take a caravan downtown.
Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear said he was briefed on LMPD's plan earlier Wednesday and said he was pleased with what he heard.
"I believe that LMPD has put together a very thoughtful plan to give people the opportunity to express their First Amendment rights but require that they do so safely," he said. "And we've got laws in Kentucky that allow for individuals to be armed at those protests or demonstrations."
Racetrack officials and others involved with the Derby are aware of what's happening. In a statement last month, Churchill Downs President Kevin Flanery said the Kentucky Derby is an important moment in the community and that he believed this year's race "will serve as a progressive unifying force that can help bring us together" at a time when protesters have taken to the streets to call for an end to police brutality and racism.
Barclay Tagg, trainer of Kentucky Derby favorite Tiz the Law, didn't sound as optimistic when he was asked about the situation on Tuesday.
"I don't know what these guys are going to do, these rioters," Tagg said. "Who knows? All I know is you're not allowed to shoot them, and they're allowed to shoot you. That's what it looks like to me, so I don't know what to think about it."
Protesters have been adamant that their demonstrations have remained peaceful. Seven people suffered nonfatal wounds in a shooting on the first night of the protests and photographer Tyler Gerth, 27, was shot and killed at Jefferson Square Park, a frequent demonstration site, in June by a man who had frequented the protests. David McAtee, a local barbecue stand owner, was killed by National Guard members at his place after they responded to a gathering after curfew in June.
Several downtown businesses were looted on May 29, but while much of downtown Louisville remains boarded up, property damage has not been a widespread issue in the following months during the protests over the death of Breonna Taylor, who was shot and killed by Louisville police executing a no-knock warrant at her apartment in March.
Protesters have demanded that three officers be charged in Taylor's death and are awaiting the results of an investigation by Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's office. Cameron has said no announcement on the case would be made this week.
Gregory said law enforcement officials want to keep opposing protesters away from one another on Saturday.
"This all comes back to safety," he said. "... In an effort to keep those persons who want to protest safe, and in an effort to keep the general public that live and work in that space safe, we will try and funnel these persons with different viewpoints into specific areas to try and prevent confrontation between those groups."
Courier Journal reporter Bailey Loosemore contributed to this report.
$$$
