Militia groups, their guns need to stay home
29 July 2020
It was utterly absurd this past weekend when two private armies came face to face in downtown Louisville with rifles slung over their shoulders and pistols strapped to their hips.
There was the Not F***ing Around Coalition (which should be called the "Sometimes F***ing Up Coalition" after one member accidentally fired off a round wounding three people while they were here) versus the Three Percenters (who should be known as "Whites' Guns Matter").
It would be funny if it wasn't so dangerous having private infantries, armed to the teeth, walking around the streets of Louisville, especially at a time when protesters and police are already on edge.
I've got a message for both "Grand Master Jay" and "Hog Girl" – the leaders of the two groups – if they plan to come back.
Stay home.
You are a danger to yourself. You are a danger to others.
You want to help? Stay the hell away.
We should all be glad the idiot who negligently capped three of his fellow NFAC members did it at Baxter Park rather than within yards of the Three Percenters.
Can you imagine the resulting carnage if a couple of poorly trained "militias" with hair triggers and chips on their shoulders had been in sight of each other when that happened?
We have enough problems right now without the militias coming from far-away places to stick their noses and their muzzles where they don't belong.
We have enough guns here.
Too many, in fact.
That's especially true since over the past 30 years or so, the Kentucky General Assembly has given the National Rifle Association everything it has asked for.
We've allowed people to carry concealed with permits. Then we allowed them to carry concealed without permits.
We've ensured a constant supply of cheap weapons on the street by requiring all guns confiscated by police – even if they were used to kill someone – to be sold at auction so they can be sold, resold and used to kill someone else.
We've even blocked cities, counties and state agencies other than courts, jails and prisons, from telling people they can't pack heat when they come inside. We've told local governments they can't do anything to try to get a handle on the gun problems in our cities.
And where has it gotten us?
A soaring number of murders and a city torn apart by racial strife that began when police, who are the ones who have to deal with this flood of weapons and torrent of murders, shot and killed a woman in her apartment.
You want to know the truth?
Guns don't make you safer. The more guns you have, the more deaths you have.
We have the most guns per capita of any country on the planet and the most gun deaths in the developed world.
All three of the shooting deaths that are somehow connected to the Black Lives Matter protests here likely wouldn't have happened if not for civilians having guns that they intended for self-protection – including the shooting that spurred it all.
While the police department's actions and errors that led to Breonna Taylor's March 13 death are the reason she is dead, Taylor would likely still be alive if not for her boyfriend firing off a round when he thought the police were criminals who were breaking into the apartment.
It was that one shot that drew fire from police that killed Taylor. She was unarmed, by the way.
State officials said David McAtee was shot by the Kentucky National Guard only after he appeared to fire two rounds out the door of his restaurant as police and soldiers moved in with pepper balls, trying to break up a crowd violating a citywide curfew order.
It was those two shots that drew fire from police and soldiers that killed McAtee.
And Tyler Gerth, my 27-year-old godson, would undoubtedly be alive today if not for the fact that a Black Lives Matter protester working "security" had a gun. According to police, Steven Lopez took the gun he allegedly used to shoot Tyler from the protester who was supposed to be providing security.
Guns don't make you safer.
They increase the chances that someone will squeeze off a round because they are angry, or stupid, or negligent, or mentally disturbed, or just misread the circumstances.
The last thing we need is more guns.
Stay home.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
The Not F***ing Around Coalition came to Louisville in support of racial justice while the Three Percenters militia also was in town. Louisville police kept the two groups apart with barricades on Saturday.
$$$
