Protesters 'not giving up' on justice
Loosemore, Bailey
Jefferson Square Park was business as usual Friday for protesters who have spent 100 days there demanding justice for Breonna Taylor.
Music played through portable speakers. Volunteers distributed free food. People took photos at an ever-changing memorial, commemorating the 26-year-old Black woman killed by police in her apartment in March.
Those present knew the day marked a major milestone in their fight against police brutality and systemic racism. But they also knew the best way to celebrate would be to stick with what's worked over the past 99 days: coming together to say Taylor's name.
Anna Harrison, a regular volunteer at the protests, said it's been "spectacular" to see people gather for so many weeks straight at the corner of Sixth and Jefferson streets, surrounded by government buildings.
But she also said the demonstration should have been able to end long ago.
"The mayor is not stepping up and doing his job. (Kentucky Attorney General) Daniel Cameron is not stepping up and doing his job," Harrison said. "... (So) people keep marching. They're not giving up; they're not backing down. They're on a mission. And their mission is not gonna be completed until they get the justice that Breonna deserves."
Specifically, protesters have continuously called for the officers involved in Taylor's death to be fired, arrested and criminally charged. That decision now lies with Cameron's office, which recently received an FBI ballistics test that's critical to the case.
As people nationwide await an announcement from Cameron, unrest has continued in Louisville, with large demonstrations resulting in hundreds of arrests.
Timothy Findley, a pastor at Kingdom Fellowship Christian Life Center and the founder of the Justice and Freedom Coalition, said at an Until Freedom press conference Friday that there has been a "continued pattern of meeting peaceful protesters with over-militarization with provocation and a continued stoking of fear."
Findley and Until Freedom, a New York-based social justice organization, have joined forces to plan a major protest outside Churchill Downs on Saturday as horses compete in the Kentucky Derby.
"I would remind everyone listening, that there have been 100 days of protesting," Findley said. "The first two days were difficult days. Ninety-eight days have been peaceful. All of the talk of looting, all of the talk of rioting, all of the talk of violence — it has not happened."
Later, Louisville Metro Police Assistant Chief LaVita Chavous said the police presence at Churchill Downs is no different than in years past.
Tamika Mallory, a co-founder of Until Freedom, said Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer has created "slave-like circumstances" for protests, noting that fencing was erected around the racetrack.
"We are not slaves. We got out of cages a long time ago, Mayor Fischer," Mallory said. "... What we believe it should mean to stand as a Democratic mayor is that you do not support slavery. But that's what it looks like when you demand that nonviolent protesters be caged up so that horses can run for the entertainment of the rich and famous.
"Meanwhile, the body and the blood of Breonna Taylor is on your hands."
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
A woman looks at a memorial for Breonna Taylor in Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville on Friday.
$$$
