Working for change
Robinson, Cameron Teague
11 July 2020
"I'm a citizen before I'm a football player. I'm a Black man before
I'm a citizen. But I'm a human before I'm any of those."
Jamon Brown, former Louisville offensive lineman, who currently plays for the Atlanta Falcons
Jamon Brown used to think his purpose in life was to play football.
The former Louisville offensive lineman, who now plays in the NFL for the Atlanta Falcons, realized he could do more with his platform as he matured. He wanted to impact people in need.
Since starting the Jamon Brown Foundation his second year in the NFL, he's worked to give back to his hometown of Louisville. One of the biggest causes he's been part of is helping to stop youth and young adult homelessness.
But when he returned to Louisville this spring, he had a few more things on his agenda. The COVID-19 pandemic became a focus as he organized a coronavirus relief fund. Then on March 13, Breonna Taylor, 26, was fatally shot by police serving a no-knock search warrant at her apartment.
Since then he's become a fixture in Louisville. He's been to countless protests, with his first one being early on. He's led Louisville football players to clean up the morning after protests and passed out Kroger gift cards in partnership with Louisville Scoop to help families in need.
Brown went to Fern Creek High School and embraces being part of the community. It's why he hasn't been shy about using his platform to better the not only his city, but whoever else he can reach.
When Brown first heard of Taylor's death, he was hurt.
"First off I was thinking about what if that was my sister. I would want answers," Brown said.
Since then he's been doing his best not only to educate himself, but use his platform to inform others who may be unaware of developments in the case and others around the country. He's spoken at rallies and was part of an event that also featured Louisville native hip hop artist Jack Harlow and others.
"I'm a citizen before I'm a football player. I'm a Black man before I'm a citizen. But I'm a human before I'm any of those," Brown said. "What was done in the Breonna Taylor case, the corruption, the wrong that was done behind it, I don't stand for it and if that was my sister, as I'm treating Breonna Taylor like my sister because we are all brother's and sisters, I'm trying to do what I can to shed light on what's going down."
In this time, though, he has to find ways to balance his emotions. There's times where he remains angry about the police brutality he sees, but knows that with his platform, as a Louisville alumni and NFL player, he has to stay level-headed.
That platform, which not only includes his foundation, but the 9,400 that follow him on Twitter and the countless others that just know his name, comes with some responsibility. And a slight burden.
"It can be because you carry a lot," Brown said. "You have to carry it in a certain way. All of us have our opinions on how you should carry your platform. I think it should be carried with utilitarianism which is taking actions that provide the most good for the most people."
That remains Brown's focus. He's reached out to U of L players, as much as he can, but the main thing he is trying to teach them is that if you have a platform, use it.
"I want them to know that they have a voice, they have a right to use their platform as such and that can mean a number of things though," Brown said. "... If you want to do, do it, don't be afraid because too many of us have and that's our biggest problem as a people."
So what's next for Brown? He'll be leaving for training camp soon and still has his eyes set on winning a Super Bowl.
But just because he's not at home, doesn't mean he won't continue his activism.
"There's protests in Atlanta too, so I want to create change anywhere I go," he said. "The issues we are facing aren't just in Louisville, they are everywhere."
Brown and the members of his foundation plan to strategize their next moves and how they can best help the city. They still have partnerships that will remain ongoing even when he's not in town.
The one thing that won't change though, is Brown's role in the protests or the fight against COVID-19 in his hometown. Whether he's in Atlanta or at Breonna Taylor Park marching with the city, he understands everybody has a role to play.
Football won't distract him from his. If anything it heightens it.
"I care about our community and the people in our community and I am one of those people of the community," Brown said. "I wanted to pop the privilege bubble we put ourselves in as one of those figures and show I'm human just like them. Breonna Taylor is human just like us and she was done wrong and that's wrong. It allowed me the opportunity to figure out why do I have the platform that I have. Am I using it for Jamon Brown's cause or am I really trying to create change to be made in our city, our state, our country and our world?"
Cameron Teague Robinson CTeagueRob@gannett.com; Twitter: @cj_teague; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"I'm a citizen before I'm a football player. I'm a Black man before
I'm a citizen. But I'm a human before I'm any of those."
Jamon Brown, former Louisville offensive lineman, who currently plays for the Atlanta Falcons
Jamon Brown, left, leads a group of volunteers during a community cleanup in downtown Louisville on June 2.
$$$
