Echoes of the past
Gardner, Hayes
25 July 2020
"It's not completely unprecedented. But we haven't seen a movement like that since the '60s."
Tracy K'Meyer
University of Louisville history professor
"I think it's remarkable that the protests in Louisville have managed to stay energized for this long."
Eladio Bobadilla
University of Kentucky history professor
They say it while discussing previous racial justice movements or personal plights, while marching through downtown Louisville or gesturing to the Breonna Taylor memorial in the center of Jefferson Square Park."This is history," say the protesters who populate Louisville's streets each night.It's a rallying cry, presented as fact, as demonstrators continue to protest the police killing of Taylor for 57 days now.
The protests in Taylor's name — which demand systemic change and for the three involved officers to be criminally charged — are the most persistent in Louisville in more than 50 years, and this year's national protests in the name of racial justice, spurred by George Floyd's death in Minnesota, may be the largest social movement in U.S. history.
"I definitely think that we're in the middle of something legendary," protest leader Chris Will said.
The Rev. A. Russell Awkard, who has served at New Zion Baptist Church since 1972, attends the protest most days and sometimes prays before marches.
The Black community, he said, has been deprived in education, in employment, in housing, in its treatment by police, and so on, for generations. He called the protests "the latest manifestation" against a system that has subjugated Black people in disparate, sustained ways.
There have been previous protests in Louisville's history, but to him, there is something different about the current movement.
"I've led a couple of marches myself, and then, of course, everybody goes back home and settles down," he said, on Day 55. "But this time, they haven't gone back home."
Louisville has seen protests over the police killing of 19-year old Black man Michael Newby in 2004, anti-busing ones in 1975, multiple anti-war demonstrations at various points, and others, but the city's protest history, like the country's, is most obviously found in the 1960s.
"It's not completely unprecedented," longtime University of Louisville history professor Tracy K'Meyer said of the Breonna Taylor demonstrations. "But we haven't seen a movement like that since the '60s. We haven't seen a prolonged, persistent, every day or every night movement since the open housing movement of 1967."
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. visited Louisville — where his brother A.D. King was a minister at Zion Baptist Church — on several occasions in 1967 to protest in favor of an open housing law, which, as he told a crowd in the West End in March of that year, would "change dark yesterdays into bright tomorrows."
He then led a march of 500 people to Memorial Auditorium, saying: "We aren't going to achieve our freedom sitting around waiting for it." Within the year, open housing legislation was passed.
That doesn't, however, mean change was instant.
The roots of that open housing movement can be traced to 1962 with the formation of the Human Relations Commission and heated up with the intense protests of '67. It was the culmination of years of work, which is historically typical.
"People seem to romanticize the civil rights movement like, Martin Luther King went to some demonstrations and oh, we got a Civil Rights Act, and everybody listened to it," said K'Meyer, whose research includes modern U.S. social movements. "None of that is true. You have to build up pressure, you have to change public opinion, because it's public opinion pressuring leaders that leads to the changes."
Generally speaking, policy change through social movement is a multifaceted war of erosion; dedicated foot soldiers must pound the pavement and the parchment, day after day, patiently prodding the larger public and, eventually, policymakers.
"It takes years. Years," said Duchess Harris, a professor of American Studies at Macalester College in Minnesota.
It's true that Minnesota has seen relatively rapid change in 2020 — the officers involved in Floyd's death were arrested, and Minneapolis has moved to defund its police department — but the Black Lives Matter movement in Minnesota didn't start with Floyd. It started years prior and notably included the 2016 police killing of Philando Castile, a 32-year-old Black man.
Social movements that have been successful in achieving policy goals have been consistent, but also varied, in their approaches. It takes marching, plus policy work, plus direct action, plus lobbying, plus more.
"You can't have (only) one form of protest, and it can't be one weekend," Harris said. "It has to be constant, and the nation responds when the nation decides that they're upset, not when the protesters are upset."
So, it's common for social movements to take years. Even still, University of Kentucky history professor Eladio Bobadilla said that, in Louisville, the length of the marches specifically stands out to him. Daily demonstrations have continued for eight straight weeks.
"I think it's remarkable that the protests in Louisville have managed to stay energized for this long," said Bobadilla, whose research interests include social movements. "Much of it is driven and fueled by rage and despair and grief."
In some ways, the Breonna Taylor protests are akin to others in Louisville's history. In 2004, about 200 people gathered and marched from Jefferson Square Park in the name of Michael Newby. In 2003, anti-war protesters locked arms, held up banners and demonstrated at public buildings. In 1967, 43 open-housing protesters were charged with disorderly conduct after marching two blocks past where their parade permit allowed.
Nationally, even the famed sit-ins of the 1960s often resulted in the same charge — trespassing — as what 87 demonstrators received last week from sitting on Attorney General Daniel Cameron's lawn.
"They were doing like the exact same thing as what's going on today," K'Meyer said of the parallels.
However, there are notable differences. For one, there is more public support today than in the 1960s, which K'Meyer said people don't often realize. The "overwhelming majority" opposed the civil rights protesters then, she said.
Additionally, current protests are more racially diverse than previous ones, both nationally and in Louisville.
Will, the protest leader, said: "I've never seen as many white people, Black people, Asian, Arabic people, even had Native Americans out here, Jamaicans, Haitians, a lot of people coming together, working together every day."
The modern demonstrations have also been uniquely propelled by social media.
Livestreaming spread the word from the beginning, and even now, tens of thousands of people tune in each night to watch on Facebook Live. That's helped the grassroots movement.
"It's not a completely leader-less thing, but it certainly has come up from the bottom," K'Meyer said.
There is also the consideration of protesting during a pandemic, of which there is no exact precedent. Many protesters are concerned with COVID-19 and encourage others to wear masks and use hand sanitizer, although many others don't wear masks at all and don't consider the coronavirus a legitimate threat.
Bobadilla said he was shocked to see the number of people take to the streets amid a pandemic from the outset.
"It speaks to the urgency of the movement, that even though it was somewhat dangerous to be out there, people also felt that it was incredibly dangerous just to be Black," he said.
Protesters often point to history to explain their motivations. They point to slavery, to 400 years of inequality, to King and the 1960s battle for civil rights. But they also point to the future, and where this moment could fit in with history yet to be cemented.
"I'm out here, because I'll be damned if my son is out here 20 years later when I can't walk, talking about, I'm fighting for the same things my father was fighting for," protester Antonio Brown said. "I cannot let that happen. I will not let that happen."
Rev. Awkard, who is 75, said there have been previous moments of significance in Louisville, moments that could've seen change and restoration and instilled pride into the Black community.
Only, they haven't been capitalized upon. The moments slipped into a history that repeats itself.
Could this — local demonstrations over Breonna Taylor's death, national protests, demands for change — be a historic, pivotal moment?
"If this is not it," Awkard said, "I don't know what will be."
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"It's not completely unprecedented. But we haven't seen a movement like that since the '60s."
Tracy K'Meyer
University of Louisville history professor
"I think it's remarkable that the protests in Louisville have managed to stay energized for this long."
Eladio Bobadilla
University of Kentucky history professor
Protest leader Chris Wells speaks into a megaphone on Tuesday night, while fellow leader Chris Will looks over his left shoulder. Said Wells to the protesters, "This is history, each and every night."
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Martin Luther King Jr. waits Aug. 20, 1967, to speak to housing protesters in Louisville's South End.
$$$
