Police prepare for counterprotests by 'armed' groups
Costello, Darcy
27 June 2020
In preparation for potentially dueling demonstrations on Saturday, Louisville Metro Police say groups will be separated by bike racks on opposite sides of Jefferson Street and that surrounding downtown streets will be closed.
Social media posts acknowledged by the department suggest that counterprotesters including "armed" patriot groups may rally against the ongoing racial justice demonstrations in Jefferson Square Park over the Breonna Taylor shooting.
Screenshots of Facebook posts show users discussing protesters who have set up tents and camped out in the park over the past few weeks: "They have til the 27th to have their fun," one said. "On the 27th we will have ours."
Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay previously said the department were aware of the social media posts but declined to go into specifics about "tactics."
A Facebook event from Derbycity Autonomous Collective says "armed out of town agitators" are coming to Louisville to protest. And a video shared Wednesday on social media from a reported member of the American Freedom Fighters said he'd told LMPD what the group was planning.
"I told them we're coming in peace. I told them we're going to be armed," he says. "Just have faith and know that everything is going as planned and everything will be directed by the police."
Halladay said Thursday that LMPD had reached out to organizers "planning to counter-protest" but said the department has not expressed support for any "disruptive actions."
On Facebook on Friday, the department posted street closures and additional information.
The post says police "will not tolerate" non-police groups barricading streets, impeding traffic or attempting to threaten or force people not involved in protests from their intended destination.
"LMPD remains committed to peaceful expression of views under the First Amendment," it said. "There will be no need for police intervention as long as there is no threat to personal or public safety."
Police will "be present in the area of Jefferson Square Park," the post adds. Two areas on opposite sides of Jefferson Street will be secured with bike rack barriers to keep the groups separate, it said.
Parking at meters along surrounding streets – Jefferson, 6th and Liberty streets – will be prohibited.
Additionally, between 6 and 7 a.m. Saturday, the following streets will be closed:
Jefferson and Liberty streets, between 5th and 7th streets.
6th Street, between Market and Liberty streets.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Protesters chant around a portrait of Breonna Taylor at Jefferson Square Park on June 4.
$$$
