Protest and guns
McLaren, Mandy
28 June 2020
Hundreds of anti-racist protesters lined a downtown Louisville block on Saturday morning, prepared for a confrontation that didn't come.
Assembled at Jefferson Square Park, the crowd – comprised of young and old, Black and white, and some people with guns – expected to face off against an armed "patriot militia," which earlier in the week said it would descend on Louisville in the morning to confront those protesting in the wake of Breonna Taylor's death.
But by mid-afternoon, no members of the "American Freedom Fighters," who organize themselves using a private Facebook group, had turned up near the downtown park.
Later in the day, a LMPD spokesperson confirmed that there was a smaller gathering of about 30 people in Thurman Hutchins Park for a few hours midday, but that group dispersed and never came downtown.
In their absence, protesters focused their frustrations on the more than two-dozen Louisville Metro Police officers stationed along Jefferson Street, which authorities had closed to traffic. LMPD said the barriers were meant to separate opposing protesters.
Separated from the officers by a barricade fashioned of bicycle racks, several protesters shouted insults before chants of "No justice! No peace!" rung out. The crowd eventually shifted inside the park, where, near a memorial for Taylor, speakers continued their demands.
Emily Evans, 28, was among those who came prepared for conflict – but was relieved when Saturday morning's events turned into another rally.
"We're gonna keep doing what we do: barbecuing, having fellowship, dancing, singing, praying together," she said. "That's what we do down here every single day."
Saturday marked the 31st day of protests in Louisville, which have been fueled by the fatal shootings of both Taylor, a Black woman who was shot and killed by police on March 13 in her apartment, and David McAtee, the western Louisville barbecue business owner shot and killed by a member of the Kentucky National Guard on June 1.
News that armed counterprotesters could be in Louisville drew many in Saturday's crowd to arrive with their own weapons, including Evans, a public school teacher.
Evans, who is white, came with a 9mm pistol strapped to her hip.
"White militias, they love their guns and they like to think that progressive people or people on the left side of the spectrum are not armed as well," she said.
"But we are Black women," she continued, pointing to an armed friend. "We are white, queer women. We have to protect ourselves, just in general, all the time. And we will protect ourselves and protect our friends and family, our Black brothers and sisters now."
Evans said there is a double standard for how gun owners in the U.S. are treated – an issue that has become increasingly clear amid recent protests, she said, referencing one that took place earlier this year, where armed demonstrators, who were mostly white men, took to the Kentucky Capitol to complain about coronavirus restrictions.
"Can you imagine if a bunch of Black men marched to the Capitol armed with AR-15s?" she asked. "The police would be everywhere."
Kenneth Sutton, 49, also arrived armed.
The U.S. Navy veteran wore a green ammunition vest, with a handgun on his side and a PTR 91 rifle strapped to his back.
Sutton, who is Black, said he wanted to change the perception of African American gun owners, who he said are often "criminalized."
"We are just regular Americans," he said. "We are the same as everyone else and enjoy the same Second Amendment rights."
Sutton's main motivation to join Saturday's protest, though, was to call attention to the deaths of both Taylor and McAtee.
"We want change across the board in our criminal justice system," he said.
In late afternoon, under gray skies, protesters marched toward the Ohio River, passing by the Second Street Bridge and River Road before circling back to Metro Hall where they chanted, "You can't stop the revolution!"
By 3 p.m., police began removing the crowd barricades and reopening streets.
Ken White, a driver for TARC and wrestling coach at Central High School, watched as police left the scene. The idea of a potential clash between the protesters and a militia group was "unnerving," he said.
White, who is Black, said he thinks the Saturday protest crowd doubled out of concern over what could have happened. As for the militia members, White said he didn't doubt that they would try again another day.
"If they didn't have large enough numbers today, they will regroup," he said.
Courier Journal reporters Billy Kobin and Savannah Eadens contributed to this story.
Mandy McLaren: 502-582-4525.
A group of protesters marched along East Washington Street after leaving Jefferson Square Park on Saturday.
Photos by Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Rhonne Green, right, becomes emotional as he explains his views to LMPD Lt. William Vogt.
Davon Taylor uses a megaphone to shout at the LMPD presence at Jefferson Square Park.
$$$
