Has LMPD finished shooting inquiry?
Duvall, Tessa; Costello, Darcy
18 June 2020
The question is simple: Is the Louisville Metro Police investigation into officer conduct in the Breonna Taylor case finished and under review by Kentucky's attorney general?
But ask that question to Mayor Greg Fischer and LMPD officials and they'll give you a different answer than Attorney General Daniel Cameron.
Fischer has repeatedly said LMPD's Public Integrity Unit investigation into the night Taylor was killed by officers has been turned over to the attorney general's office to decide next steps.
"His office has materials necessary to review the facts of this case and make a determination that serves justice," Fischer said Friday before signing an ordinance dubbed "Breonna's Law." "I urge him to do that as soon as possible."
On Wednesday afternoon, Sgt. Lamont Washington, a spokesman for the police department, reiterated that the case is "currently with the AG."
"We think it is clear that this case has already moved faster than most as it is already in the hands of the Attorney General," he wrote in a statement. "However, we do not have an expected time of completion to report. We have no further comment at this time."
But Cameron's office says LMPD's investigation isn't done yet.
This week, a spokeswoman for Cameron said it was the office's understanding the police's Public Integrity Unit "will conclude their investigation in the short term."
And Metro Council President David James said Cameron told him Tuesday night he was "still waiting on the complete file from LMPD."
The investigation's completion — or non-completion — is more than a he-said, he-said.
The attorney general's review will determine whether the officers involved in Taylor's March 13 death face state criminal charges, as protesters have demanded for weeks.
Fischer, in repeatedly saying that the investigation had been "substantially" completed and turned over to Cameron's office, is essentially saying the case is out of his police department's hands. And he's repeatedly pointed to the importance of the "process" playing out before any disciplinary decisions are made.
If, in fact, the investigation is ongoing, it will likely take longer for the attorney general to come to a conclusion on criminal charges.
Sam Aguiar, an attorney for Taylor's family, said this month that he was told by the attorney general's office that the investigation could take up to two to three more months.
Now, Aguiar said, he believes LMPD's Public Integrity Unit has essentially completed its investigation.
"I do not think the AG's office or the FBI wants to just be satisfied with that," he said. "I'm confident they want to go do their own work, which I'm OK with. ... We are pleased to hear that they're not just deferring to the (Public Integrity Unit) investigation to make their findings. We would rather them have a thorough and complete investigation that includes their own work."
Aguiar also took to social media to debunk a rumor that the officers will not face criminal charges.
"Hell, do you really think they'd act this quickly?" he wrote on Facebook. "We know better after all this time. Anyways, this rumor is not accurate and is nothing more than an effort to promote violence. Stay safe. Don't believe these rumors. Keep standing up for Breonna and for justice."
A Cameron spokeswoman declined further comment on the materials the office had been provided "as our investigation is ongoing." Earlier this month, spokeswoman Elizabeth Kuhn said in an email that the office was "continuing to determine what investigatory steps we believe need to take place."
Cameron's review of the case for potential state criminal charges isn't the only review that will take place. A separate, independent FBI investigation is ongoing, and Fischer has said he welcomes those results.
"There's frustration. I get that," Fischer said. "Investigations and reviews like this take time, and that time period often times does not align with the expectations of our citizens."
Fischer first announced that the case had been turned over to Cameron's office on May 20, with LMPD to provide additional information as requested.
Cameron released a statement on Twitter on May 29 that said, "Despite reports, my office does not have the full LMPD investigation, which we understand remains ongoing."
On May 26, The Courier Journal filed a lawsuit against LMPD, seeking the immediate release of the department's investigative file regarding Taylor's death.
The lawsuit argues LMPD's internal investigation into the shooting is final once it leaves the department and therefore should be released under the state's open records laws.
"Our response is based on the fact that we don't want to jeopardize further action on the case," Jean Porter, a spokeswoman for the mayor's office, said at the time of the lawsuit's filing. "No prosecutorial decision has been made yet; the premature release of materials can harm the integrity of further investigation and potential prosecution."
Michael Abate, an attorney for The Courier Journal, said LMPD is incorrect in denying all requests related to Taylor's case because of a pending investigation. Instead, the department should outline any specific harm that would be caused by disclosing a document, he said.
"They have done exactly what the Supreme Court said they can't do, which is to adopt a blanket policy of nondisclosure in a presumption that anything related to an ongoing investigation has to be kept secret," Abate said.
The case remains pending in Jefferson Circuit Court.
Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician, was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro police fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a search warrant as a part of a narcotics investigation.
Court records show that police obtained a warrant with a no-knock provision for Taylor's apartment signed by Circuit Judge Mary Shaw. Even so, officials have said that plainclothes officers knocked and announced their presence before breaking in Taylor's door with a battering ram.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who was also in the apartment, fired one shot in response, hitting Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove returned fire, striking Taylor at least eight times.
She died in her hallway.
Walker has said he thought intruders were breaking in. He and neighbors have said they never heard police announce themselves before entering, according to his attorney and lawyers for Taylor's family.
Officers can't be suspended without pay in Breonna Taylor case, city attorney memo says. Metro, 3A
Jakiyah Austin wears a Breonna Taylor mask during a peaceful protest Tuesday evening in downtown Louisville.
$$$
