For Harbut, Derby is platform, not protest
05 Sep 2020
Greg Harbut wants to use the Kentucky Derby as a platform. Pastor Timothy Findley would prefer that he skip it as a protest.
Two men united in their desire for racial justice are at polar extremes about strategy. While Harbut hopes his decision to run long shot Necker Island in America's most prestigious horse race might attract more of his fellow Black Americans to a white-dominated sport, Findley says Harbut should boycott Saturday's race for the sake of a larger cause.
"I am completely understanding where they're coming from," said Findley, leader of Louisville's Justice and Freedom Coalition. "I'd be more understanding if I felt like this was just a fleeting moment. Unfortunately, this is a moment that I believe everyone has to choose which side of history they will be on."
Considering that Necker Island has finished no better than third in seven starts this year, it seems unlikely his presence or absence could make a material difference in Derby 146.
Yet as a Black owner in a sport conspicuously short on racial diversity among investors and executives, Harbut sees both tangible and symbolic value in his Run for the Roses.
"We will be running the horse with a great deal of support from the activists," said Harbut, a 35-year-old bloodstock agent. "We support Black Lives Matter. We support justice for Breonna Taylor. The majority of what we are seeing is nothing but positive support from the community and from the movement.
"... Ray Daniels and myself made a strategic mission two years ago to bring African Americans into this industry. This industry as a whole could do a much better job of opening itself up to inclusiveness and diversity. What better stage do we have, on the biggest racing day in North America, to participate as African Americans in an industry that isn't necessarily inclusive of us?"
Rather than any racing-specific grievances, it is the size of that stage that will attract activists to Churchill Downs on Saturday. Protesters frustrated by the delays and indecision of the authorities following the death of Breonna Taylor in a March police raid see the Derby as an opportunity to have their concerns amplified before a national audience.
"It's been 5 1/2 months since Breonna Taylor was murdered," Findley said. "It's been 5 1/2 months of inconsistent leadership, of conflicting statements between the mayor and the attorney general. And yet, in these five months hundreds upon hundreds of protesters have been arrested, and yet (of) the four individuals who are responsible for her death, one lost their job, no one's been indicted."
Though Churchill Downs would seem to bear no direct responsibility for any of that, Findley says the racetrack's history and practices are deserving of harsh scrutiny. He cites the ritualized singing of "My Old Kentucky Home," a song he regards as "very racist," along with the track's efforts at gentrification, its alleged failure to invest in "distressed communities" and its reluctance to speak out about the Breonna Taylor case.
Though publicly traded companies are not always quick to confront concerns beyond the narrow scope of their businesses, Churchill Downs issued a statement Thursday that showed both unusual contrition and acute sensitivity to tensions that could escalate Saturday.
"We hear the calls to do more and we have challenged ourselves to do so," it said. "We hear the voices that tell us we have not successfully created an environment in which everyone feels welcome or included. That is not acceptable and we need to do more to ensure that our best intentions become a reality. We need to do more, now, to ensure that every member of our community is a part of our traditions."
That pledge has personal resonance for Greg Harbut. Though his grandfather, Tom Harbut, bred and co-owned Touch Bar, Churchill's segregationist seating prevented him from watching the horse compete in the 1962 Derby.
"I'm happy to be here," Greg Harbut said. "But with everything that's going on in the country and what my grandfather faced directly, it holds great sentiment for me.
"... The best part of the experience is knowing that a person who doesn't necessarily come from an oil background or royal family money is able to participate, to bring awareness of the African American contributions that came before me and hopefully see this as a platform to engage not only African Americans but other minorities to come into this sport."
Tim Sullivan: 502-582-4650, tsullivan@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @TimSullivan714. Subscribe today: courier-journal.com/tims.
Tim Sullivan
Insider
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Timothy Findley of the Kingdom Fellowship Life Center speaks on Aug. 11, 2016, about the LMPD shooting of Darnell Thomas Wicker.
Marty Pearl/Special to the Courier Journal
$$$
