Paul's 'funny' timing on anti-lynching bill
Gerth, Joseph
06 June 2020 
If it's true that the secret to great comedy is timing, then slap Rand Paul upside the head and call him "Henny Youngman."
I mean, who else in the U.S. Senate has such perfect timing that they would block passage of legislation making the lynching of an African American a hate crime at a time when virtually every major U.S. city is beset by protests and riots over the treatment of black people?
Now, the timing's not all his fault. He's been blocking this legislation for months.
It all blew up on Wednesday when he confirmed that he was, in fact, the guy who was holding up the Emmett Till Antilynching Act, which has laid dormant since it arrived in the Senate in February.
So, why is he holding it up?
That all depends on who — or what — you're taking your cues from.
See, if you listen to Paul, it sounds like he's worried that someone might be charged with a federal hate crime offense if they simply cause "minor bruising" in a failed attempt to string someone up from a tree or beat them to death.
That's certainly what he is reported to have said in news stories about interviews he gave on Wednesday and the impression he left in his first crack at explaining his position on the Senate floor on Thursday.
But if you read the amendment he filed Thursday afternoon, you'll see that he really wants language in the bill that wouldn't allow charges against someone who gets into a simple barroom brawl and punches an African American.
Rand, buddy, I'm with you. A barroom brawl shouldn't be a federal crime.
But the bill in the Senate wouldn't make a run-of-the-mill fight a federal crime.
"One man is standing in the way of the law of the land changing because of a difference of interpretation," Sen. Cory Booker, of New Jersey, said during a floor debate Thursday. "This doesn't talk about bruising someone."
He's held this bill up for no good reason.
If they ever remake "Monty Python and the Holy Grail," they ought to consider Paul for the role of the Black Knight.
"'Tis only a scratch."
What matters here isn't the severity of the injury. It's the intent of the person inflicting it.
That's always been the case.
Take for instance Lynette "Squeaky" Fromme, who tried to assassinate President Gerald Ford in 1975.
Wasn't even a flesh wound.
She loaded four rounds into her .45 caliber Colt pistol's magazine but didn't have a cartridge in the chamber, giving the U.S. Secret Service time to stop her before she got off a shot at the president.
Not even minor bruising.
Fromme still got a life sentence and served 34 years in federal prison before she was released on parole a decade ago.
Richard Reid, the shoe bomber, is serving three life terms and another 110 years at a supermax in Colorado for his unsuccessful attempt to bring down an airliner flying from Paris to Miami in 2001.
Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the underwear bomber, tried but failed to bring down Northwest Flight 253 in 2009. He's serving four life sentences plus an additional 50 years in prison.
Long federal sentences. Not even minor injuries.
On Wednesday, Paul told reporters, "We think that lynching is an awful thing that should be roundly condemned, that should be universally condemned."
His initial message seemed to be this: Let's condemn them, but let's not prosecute them unless they seriously harm someone.
A regular Shecky Greene, that guy.
And, so, he's blocking passage of the bill in the Senate even though it had broad support there and even though it passed the House on a vote of 410-4. (One of the only "no" votes, of course, came from Kentucky's other funny guy in Washington, U.S. Rep. Thomas Massie.)
Meanwhile, Minneapolis is on fire after George Floyd was killed when a white police officer put his knee on his neck for more than eight minutes — all the while Floyd pleaded he couldn't breathe until his body fell lifeless.
Atlanta has watched as riots and protests have taken over that city after a white father and son — the father had worked as an investigator for the local prosecutor — shot and killed Ahmaud Arbery while he was out running in a southern Georgia neighborhood.
And here in Louisville, we've had a week worth of protests and several days of violence after three white police officers burst into the home of Breonna Taylor, who was killed by police gunfire after her boyfriend fired a single shot. He said he didn't know it was the police.
And it's with this as a backdrop that Paul is still blocking passage of the Emmett Till Antilynching Act.
Funny guy that Rand Paul. Or perhaps a laughingstock.
$$$
