What officials say after 2 officers shot in city
Ladd, Sarah
25 Sep 2020
Louisville leaders and officials swiftly condemned violence on Thursday morning following a Wednesday night shooting that left two police officers injured.
LMPD Maj. Aubrey Gregory and Officer Robinson Desroches were injured about 8:30 p.m. near Broadway and Brook Street in the hip and abdomen, respectively, and both are recovering. Larynzo Johnson, 26, was arrested and faces charges related to those injuries.
The shooting came as protesters took to the streets once more after learning no officers involved in the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, would face charges directly related to her death.
President Donald Trump was quick to tweet his support for the two injured officers and pledged "The Federal Government stands behind you and is ready to help."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer, however, said in a Thursday press conference that "we feel like we have the resources that we need on the ground right here in Louisville."
"What we saw last night with the two police officers being shot is obviously completely unacceptable," Fischer said. "Violence will only be a source of pain, not a cure for pain. And we know that violence is never the answer."
LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder, describing a "tense and stressful time for officers" said people might expect a similar police response to protests on Thursday night as on Wednesday.
"I think we can anticipate a variety of protest activities through tonight through the weekend, and continuing on for some time," he said.
Meanwhile, U.S. Attorney Russell Coleman warned of swift federal charges for people not remaining peaceful during protests.
"Federal law enforcement here in Louisville is sworn to protect First Amendment-protected speech, to include peaceful protest," he said in a statement. "A key provision of that constitutional right though, is to be 'peaceable.' Shooting this city's law enforcement officers, looting its businesses, and committing arson at the front door of its state courthouse is far from peaceable.
"Louisville has endured enough loss of life; we are experiencing historic levels of murders and shootings of our neighbors," he went on. "No one else in this community should face the loss of a loved one or destruction of their place of business. Cross the line from peaceful protest into federal criminal conduct that puts people at risk and we will do everything in our power to swiftly bring federal charges. If you use lawful protest as a cover to harm this city, be prepared to stare down a federal judge."
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder talks to members of the media across the street from the University of Louisville Hospital on Wednesday.
$$$
