Black rage
19 July 2020
The flames ignited in search of justice for Breonna Taylor, George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery represented so much more. No matter who was actually responsible for the fires that destroyed property across America, including right here in Louisville, people like me could empathize with the destructive urge.
It is an urge cultivated by a perpetual aura of helplessness, embedded in a system that sees us as products and profits, but not people.
Our contributions are invaluable, yet our rewards are disproportionate. This is a formula sustained by generations of conditioning, where you're made to believe that your options are limited.
At any moment, white supremacy and its offspring of mass incarceration, police brutality and countless other mechanisms of oppression are on hand to remind you that you are not only unappreciated, but inferior. How could you not want to destroy that?
To me, the flames are symbolic manifestations of a combustible paradox. Most of us would contend that we know we aren't inferior, but when your entire environment is designed to convince you otherwise, it takes a conscious, dedicated effort to maintain your sense of self-worth
. The result is a constant struggle that can be traced throughout our history back to our illegitimate displacement in 1619. James Baldwin described this paradox as the dehumanization of the Negro, in which we are all represented by a social reality that leaves no room for individualism.
Constraints on individual expression, the absence of an outlet for a Black man's voice, result in the rage-inspired outcries we see before us today.
I've been one of the lucky ones. I've been able to channel rage into the pursuit of knowledge, based on a belief that education can produce liberation. As a student and professor of entrepreneurship, I work to conceptualize the value that resides in our own (Black) communities, and teach strategies for realizing this value through collective action. However, my journey represents just one of many potential consequences of perpetual, systemically induced rage.
A Black man's environment can cause his rage to manifest in different ways. From an evolutionary perspective this is defined as path dependency; in a system of oppression, any given Black man will undergo a unique evolution contingent upon his experiences and history. I would categorize my evolution as one of personal triumph fueled by anger. But personal triumph isn't as sweet considering the evolution of many of my brothers.
Some suppress the rage to the point of ignorance. Perhaps not the traditional stigmatic form of ignorance, but disinterest in understanding the paradox, constraints and rage until their subconscious becomes quiet.
Others fall into another category marked by an increasingly impetuous disposition to guard against seemingly imminent defeat. These people will risk attack by tear gas and rubber bullets to stand up for their humanity.
They are clinching to their last strand of hope. Their hearts have endured emotional and mental laceration, and then the world sees them as heartless. It is a losing proposition. As one of the lucky ones, I have a responsibility to give voice to their cries.
Malcolm Muhammad is a Ph.D. candidate in entrepreneurship at the University of Louisville. He can be reached at malcolm.muhammad@louisville.edu.
Your Turn
Malcom Muhammad
Guest columnist
Protesters light trash cans on fire on Sixth Street on May 29.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Louisville Metro police officers move in after firing tear gas to disperse protesters on Sixth Street on May 30.
Pat McDonogh / Courier Journal
A picnic table is set on fire in the middle of Sixth Street during a protest in downtown Louisville on May 28.
$$$
