No confidence in Mayor Fischer? Metro Council poised for pivotal vote
Costello, Darcy
10 Sep 2020
Mayor Greg Fischer is facing an unprecedented no-confidence vote at the hands of the Louisville Metro Council next week — a potentially stinging rebuke of his leadership over his handling of historic protests for racial justice.
On a 3-3 committee vote Wednesday, the harsh but largely symbolic legislation advanced to the full council over the objections of Democrats who disagreed with its timing and intent.
"I do not believe the mayor is the right person to lead us out of this," said Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, a co-sponsor. "I have lost confidence in him."
The resolution, sponsored by the full Republican caucus but no Democrats, would not remove Fischer from office — a separate process codified in state law. It instead urges him to resign so the community can "begin the process of healing."
"It makes no sense to change the coach when you're at the Super Bowl and it's halftime," said Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th District, who voted against it. "It's not quitting time."
Still, such a vote would be a significant statement by the Metro Council that council members no longer have faith in Fischer's ability to lead the city through the tumultuous period of both fighting the coronavirus pandemic and responding to protests for racial justice that grew out of the police killing of Breonna Taylor.
The resolution will be on the Metro Council's Sept. 17 agenda — though it's possible it could be amended, tabled or sent back to committee before any vote is taken.
Councilman Mark Fox, D-13th District, was the sole Democrat to join Republican members James Peden, R-23rd, and Marilyn Parker, R-18th, in voting to support a no-confidence vote. Democrats Barbara Shanklin, D-2nd, Sexton Smith, and Madonna Flood, D-24th, voted against it.
Fischer said in a statement Wednesday evening that "these are challenging times in our city," and that he and his team are working hard every day to address the challenges Louisville faces — including the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic downturn, rising violent crime and racial justice protests.
And he struck a conciliatory note, stating that he knows he's "made mistakes" and "disappointed some."
"I am deeply sorry for that, and most importantly, I am sorry for the tragic death of Breonna Taylor," he said. "This resolution further divides us at a time when we must work together, and I humbly ask for greater partnership with the Council as we move ahead to improve our city."
Fischer, a 10-year Democratic mayor who handily won a third term two years ago with two-thirds of the vote, has come under fire from seemingly all sides of the political spectrum.
Republicans, and some conservative-leaning Democrats, have concerns about his leadership of the police department and want to see stronger enforcement of laws.
Some on the other side of the aisle align more with protesters' concerns – questioning his handling of the Taylor case and why he hasn't fired all the officers involved.
Finding a majority of council members to support a no-confidence resolution would require bridging those two factions.
For instance, Councilwoman Jessica Green, D-1st District, who chairs the Public Safety Committee but was absent on Wednesday, told The Courier Journal the week the resolution was filed in August that some of the language doesn't encapsulate the way her constituents feel.
"People across the aisle have concerns, but based on language in that document, it's not reflective of the sentiment my constituents have," Green said, adding that her district's residents have lost faith in Fischer because of how he's treated the officers who fatally shot Taylor.
One of the officers who fired his weapon, Detective Brett Hankison, was fired in June, while two others, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove, remain on administrative reassignment.
The resolution gives a few reasons for the no-confidence vote:
Systemic changes are needed at LMPD, in large part due to the "actions and inactions of Mayor Greg Fischer."
Homicides in the city are rising.
Fischer has "chosen to prevent" his staff from participating in council hearings connected to the committee investigation into his response to Taylor's death and ongoing protests.
Fischer "failed to promptly address" allegations of misconduct in Louisville Metro Animal Services, TARC and the LMPD Explorer program.
It took Fischer "77 days to acknowledge his administration refused to enforce local and state laws."
Fischer previously dismissed the legislation as "the kind of partisan and divisive political games that have paralyzed Washington, D.C.," adding that it was sad and shameful for Metro Council Republicans to bring them to Louisville.
"These are difficult times for all cities in America, ours included, and these challenges are bigger than any one person," Fischer said Aug. 17, when the proposal was filed. "Now is the time for all elected officials to work together, more than ever, toward common solutions to the ongoing crises of the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic downturn and the calls for racial justice."
Some Democratic council members, meanwhile, worry that moving forward with the no-confidence vote could undercut the investigation from the Metro Council's Government Oversight and Audit Committee that is examining Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, David McAtee's death and ongoing protests in the city.
That committee on Tuesday received a court victory when a judge ruled that Fischer administration officials were required to testify in open session. The chair, Councilman Brent Ackerson, D-26th, said he'd reissued subpoenas for Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess and LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder, calling on them to appear before the committee on Sept. 16.
$$$
