What would John Lewis say and do?
25 July 2020
In the same issue of the Courier Journal where you quote Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron saying former Congressman John Lewis' "... fight against injustice ... will resonate ... for generations." You also quote Cameron complaining that the peaceful protest at his home was "not acceptable" and that "justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property."
It's unfortunate that Cameron does not know how many times John Lewis "trespassed" and committed other acts of civil disobedience. No one was arrested more times for nonviolent protests against "injustice" than John Lewis. The questions Attorney General Cameron has to ask himself is what would John Lewis say AND DO to see justice for Breonna Taylor.
Walter Tillow
Louisville, 40208
McConnell needs to rediscover world Mitch McConnell once told me he was the "best friend of Africa in the Republican Party," and throughout his Senate career, he has shown that he values our nation's role in combating global poverty. But, while the number of people living at the edge of starvation is expected to double as a result of the COVID crisis, the first three COVID relief acts have offered only paltry foreign assistance. Now McConnell indicates that his final COVID bill will include no assistance for poor countries struggling to respond to the devastating pandemic. Mitch needs to rediscover the world and heed the call of US relief agencies to include at least $12 billion in the global response to COVID-19.
Rev. Gary Cook
Louisville, 40206
Trump is cowardly Has anyone else noticed that our current President is very cowardly as most bullies are, when a bully is confronted they normal turn and run. He does not want any tough or hard decisions that may upset his base, pushing all of those decisions back to the governors. Now, he finally decided to wear a mask since the polls indicate a majority think they should be worn and claim it is patriotic and he is the most patriotic person in America to save face. Under his failed leadership, this country and our democracy are in great danger!
Dennis Steier
Louisville, 40218
$$$
