Fischer, attorneys, family react
Austin, Emma
16 Sep 2020
"We must not lose focus on what the real drive is, ... it's time to move forward with the criminal charges because she deserves that and much more."
Tamika Palmer
Breonna Taylor's mother
Louisville heard from both sides of the settlement reached between the city and the family of Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman fatally shot by police in March.
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer announced Tuesday details about a settlement to the civil lawsuit, which includes a payment of $12 million to Taylor's family and several policing reforms.
The settlement comes as an announcement over the criminal investigation into her death from Attorney General Daniel Cameron is expected soon. Taylor's mother and supporters of the movement calling for justice for Taylor stressed that the settlement is only the beginning, and more is needed for full justice to be reached.
Here's what Fischer, county and family attorneys and Taylor's family and others said about the settlement during Tuesday's press conference:
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer "While her death was a tragedy for so many, let's remember that Breonna was first a daughter, a sister, a granddaughter, a niece, a girlfriend, a friend and a coworker, and for those who knew her Breonna's death is personal. The pain is visceral, and the loss of her more devastating.
"Tamika Palmer, Breonna's mom, says Breonna was a quick student, a hard worker and an old soul, that she was the glue of the family. Breonna was loved. I cannot begin to imagine Ms. Palmer's pain. I'm deeply, deeply sorry for Breonna's death.
"While we await a decision from Attorney General Daniel Cameron on whether or not charges will be filed in this case, my administration is not waiting to move ahead with needed reforms to prevent the tragedy like this from ever happening again."
The settlement does not say there was any wrongdoing but acknowledges a need for reform, Fischer said.
Lonita Baker, attorney for Breonna Taylor's family "Justice for Breonna is multi-layered. What we were able to accomplish today through the civil settlement against the officers is tremendous, but it's only a portion of a single layer. When officers cause the death of an individual, it is imperative that we seek justice, not only at the criminal system but also in our civil system. That's when we hold people financially responsible."
But a financial settlement was non-negotiable without significant police reform, and that's what was accomplished, Lonita Baker said.
"We would not get the legal changes that we need if we don't hold our elected leaders accountable, but in that same vein, we have to be willing to work with our elected leaders. The beauty of what happened here today — the reform and the settlement, and again, it's just a civil suit — happens when we work together, and so we do thank Mayor Fischer and his team for committing to the reform."
Civil settlements including both financial payment and police reform is unheard of, Baker said.
"It was important for us to give that back to the community which has been fighting so hard to say Breonna Taylor's name."
Mike O'Connell, Jefferson County attorney "Breonna Taylor's life matters. Breonna Taylor's life continues to matter, as you can see here today. I've thought about Breonna's mother, Ms. Palmer, throughout everything that has led up to today. The hole in my heart of losing a child as well is the greatest grief I've ever known in my life, and nothing can fill that hole.
"I've tried to think how I would have reacted if Breonna was my daughter. Ms. Palmer has shown remarkable grace and courage these past six months."
Mike O'Connell echoed Baker's comments, saying the settlement is more than a significant monetary figure, but "a path of agreed action" through the reforms within the police department.
"My hope is this agreement is the next step in building a more just Louisville. A more just Louisville is the medicine we need to heal."
Benjamin Crump, attorney for Breonna Taylor's family "It has been so long getting to this day, where we could assure that Breonna Taylor's life won't be swept under the rug like so many other Black women in America who have been killed by police, marginalized. So I am grateful to the actions of the city of Louisville today."
Benjamin Crump said he started calling everyone he knew after Baker and attorney Sam Aguiar told him they were concerned "nobody cared" about Taylor's case.
"I was saying to anybody who would listen: Breonna Taylor's life matters. ... We cannot let her life be swept under the rug."
Taylor's family is still demanding the attorney general bring charges against the police officers who killed her, Crump said.
"Justice delayed is justice denied," Crump said. "The city leadership has done a significant step today, but now it is on Daniel Cameron and the attorney general of Kentucky's office to bring charges and at the bare minimum ... second degree manslaughter charges."
Crump also asked the city to drop charges against all non-violent Breonna Taylor protesters, who have taken to Louisville's streets every day for more than three months.
"These young people should not have criminal records because they were on the right side of history," Crump said. "We want you all to be on the right side of history with us completely. Drop those charges in Breonna Taylor's name."
Tamika Palmer, Breonna Taylor's mother "As significant as today is, it's only the beginning of getting full justice for Breonna. We must not lose focus on what the real drive is, and with that being said, it's time to move forward with the criminal charges because she deserves that and much more.
"Her beautiful spirit and personality is working through all of us on the ground, so please continue to say her name: Breonna Taylor."
Tamika Mallory, social justice activist with Until Freedom "A settlement is restitution, but it's not arresting the cops, and we want to say today that the police officers responsible for killing Breonna Taylor must be arrested in order for the community to feel calm.
"We understand that this is an acknowledgement, and a great acknowledgement, of the wrongdoing that has happened, and it is important that our community understands what happened here today is very significant."
Tamika Mallory, who's been a leader of some of the organized protests over Taylor's death, said people shouldn't lose sight of the main focus of arresting the three officers who shot their guns in Taylor's apartment the night she died, as well as Detective Joshua Jaynes, who secured the search warrant for Taylor's home.
"We cannot forget about any of those officers, and if this police department is to do right by this community, they should be arrested and indicted immediately. Again, the restitution portion is one part, but arresting the officers is what will make this city do right by its citizens."
If the officers are not indicted, they should be fired on the spot, Mallory said.
Keturah Herron, policy strategist for the ACLU of Kentucky "To Breonna Taylor's family: You deserve better than having to fight for six months after officers from Louisville Metro Police Department, some of whom remain nameless, killed your beloved family member. You deserve closure. You deserve rest. You deserve to be cared for and loved on and supported for the rest of your days. I am grateful you have reached this point of some closure."
Keturah Herron, who is also a member of Black Lives Matter Louisville, said she promised "we will keep this fight going, and we will win."
"We are not only fighting against the deadly violence that is intercultural policing, we are fighting for a completely different vision of being in community together. We are creating something different. We are creating a community that no longer invests our tax dollars in people who kill our neighbors."
Herron called for an end to the "so-called compassionate community that was never actually compassionate" and for investment in Louisville Black lives.
"Understand that this is not over. We are demanding for individual accountability and institutional accountability. While the culture of white supremacy has lied to you about what accountability means, let me tell you: Accountability includes self reflection, repair, apology and changed behavior. Changed behavior means no longer incentivized violence to abuse and kill our people. Accountability means an end to transactions that tinker around the edges."
Herron shared words of Harriet Tubman: "If you hear the dogs, keep going. If you see torches in the woods, keep going. If they're shouting after you, keep going. If you want a taste of freedom, keep going."
Reach Emma Austin at eaustin@gannett.com or on Twitter at @emmacaustin. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: subscribe.courier-journal.com.
"We must not lose focus on what the real drive is, ... it's time to move forward with the criminal charges because she deserves that and much more."
Tamika Palmer
Breonna Taylor's mother
Tamika Mallory, Until Freedom activist
$$$
