It doesn't feel like Derby.
03 Sep 2020
It's beginning to look a lot like Derby
Everywhere you go.
Take a look at the track and stands.
Bustling once again.
With rose garlands and bourbon bars a-flow.
I'm going to stop right there before this little parody gets any more ridiculous.
Louisville's equivalent of a national holiday is right around the corner, and no, it's not beginning to look a lot like Derby.
And it certainly doesn't feel like it.
The monsoon that is this year has washed out everything fun, and we tried to stop it by pushing our annual celebration to September, but 2020 did in fact come for our Kentucky Derby, too.
Our calendar feels out of sorts right now, so it shouldn't surprise me that as I was walking down Bardstown Road in the Highlands neighborhood the other day, I had "It's Beginning to Look A Lot Like Christmas" stuck in my head. Those catchy, off-season lyrics brought me to a strange pause.
The sights and sounds of the season — Kentucky's favorite season — are hard to find.
We are not celebrating this year, and quite frankly, our city is grieving with good reason. Throwing our annual two-week party leading up the fastest two minutes in sports would feel callous as Louisville enters its 14th week of protests due to the killing of Breonna Taylor and the coronavirus inches closer to claiming 1,000 deaths in our state.
This long, drawn-out lead up to the rescheduled 146th running of the Kentucky Derby feels ominous and strange.
Sure you can still walk into any Kroger in town and buy a fascinator or a signature Kentucky Derby glass. Every time I see that section, though, it reminds me of those "What's Wrong" activities in an old "Highlights For Kids" magazine where you have to pick out the things in picture that seem absurd. Think along the lines of hamburgers growing on trees or dogs walking their owners.
In this case, though, it's the fact that the Derby decorations are sharing aisles with school supplies instead of Easter eggs. Usually around the Kentucky Derby season, children's crayons from the August before have worked their way down to the nub, but this year your kiddos are just opening fresh packs to color whatever jockey silks or hats may be on their assignment list. Not to mention, they're likely coloring them from an in-home work station instead of in their classrooms because of the coronavirus.
Speaking of schools, Oaks Day is still considered a school holiday for Jefferson County Public Schools on this very strange September running of the Kentucky Derby. At least that hasn't changed, but my guess is that for any school or workplace that honors that Louisville tradition, it'll look more like a long four-day Labor Day weekend than the first weekend in May.
The closer we get to Derby, particularly now that they've pulled all fans from the stands, the less excited people seem to be.
Which actually brings me to something my Courier Journal colleague, Kirby Adams, mentioned the other day. We've spent so much time wondering whether the track would have fans in the stands, how many of them there would be and if any of this could be done safely — but has anyone even talked about the weather?
Normally in the days leading up to the Kentucky Derby, we're eyeing the skies, and if they're as grim as they were two years ago — the wettest Derby Day on record — we're figuring out fashionable ways to stay dry and researching which horse is the best mudder.
Of course the weather matters for your pocketbook and your bets, but the only way it'll affect your Derby look this year is if you're planning to attend one of 2020's hyper in-vogue outdoor, socially distant patio gatherings.
Honestly, we could have the clearest, most beautiful day and the whole week would just feel like a wet blanket.
When I realized that, I started wondering if it was beginning to look like Derby anywhere.
So I took a stroll down South Fourth Street in downtown Louisville, naively thinking that maybe shopkeepers had crossed their pumpkin-themed autumn lines with this year's Derby gear. Yes, even with the pandemic and the protests, there are a few boutiques open.
I thought back to the "pumpkin spice mint julep" joke one of my colleagues made when they first announced the 146th Kentucky Derby would run in September. Maybe someone was having fun with that.
But you can't go window shopping when the only thing to look at is plywood that's been installed to protect the glass. The protests and the pandemic have given downtown a whole new vibe, and it's more ghost town than barnyard chic.
I did, however, spot one Derby window display at The Brown Hotel's gift shop, 335 W. Broadway. That shouldn't have surprised me. The historic hotel has a way of making every day feel like the Kentucky Derby.
I popped inside and browsed through collections of rocks glasses, fancy hats and bourbon-inspired hot sauces. Then I spotted a framed copy of the official poster for the 146th running of the Kentucky Derby, an image I hadn't thought about since the pandemic shutdown in March.
Fans pack the stands in that poster and seeing that simple assumption by the artists gave me a sad chill.
I headed upstairs to the bar area, where a colleague and I fought for a table the Thursday before Derby in 2018. Now there's plexiglass around the bar for COVID-19 safety, and they've socially distanced the lobby bar.
Every year the Brown Hotel displays a large vase with just as many roses as the running year. The general manager told The Courier Journal they're still planning to have 146 roses the first week of September, but I have to wonder how many guests will be there to see them. Or even if they'll come to town to celebrate the Derby at all.
That's when I started googling hotel prices, and no, that didn't make things feel anymore like Derby time, either.
I don't think it's ever been easier to find a hotel room in downtown Louisville in the days leading up to the biggest event of the year for the horse racing industry. As of last Thursday, I had my pick of places to stay for less than $200, whether I wanted a room at The Brown Hotel, The Seelbach Hotel or The Galt House Hotel. Normally those are Derby week hot spots that run closer to $1,000 per night, with three-night minimums.
Today they're seemingly not even trying to inflate prices for a Labor Day uptick, let alone a Derby one.
I left the Brown and headed a few blocks north to Fourth Street Live. I stared sadly at the carefully arranged mountain of plywood that now covered the Jim Beam Urban Stillhouse and then turned toward a sea of socially distant, empty tables in the middle of the plaza. A lone couple was eating on the patio at Guy Fieri's Smokehouse. Usually around Derby time, this dining hub is home to a large stage and a bustling lunch crowd.
On this afternoon, though, the only thing it was filled with was emptiness.
Back in my car, I circled Main and Market streets, and I headed toward NuLu. The vibe was more upbeat here, but that's a relative statement this year. Even with more window displays and less plywood, you still wouldn't know Derby was upon us. Protesters have called upon the shopping and dining district to embrace the Black Lives Matter movement. I spotted a sign outside Taj Louisville that said "Please Do Not Enter If You Have Symptoms of COVID-19, Racism and Homophobia."
I wondered what that board would have said last year in the days leading up to the 145th Run for the Roses.
I turned my attention toward the hospital district and thought about the bleachers that usually line Broadway for the Kentucky Derby Festival's annual Pegasus Parade. They're not there this year, of course, but the traffic and parking issues are about as synonymous with the Derby as mint juleps are. Oddly enough, even with the rest of the desolation, we've got no shortage of those this year.
Instead of high school bands or a giant inflatable winged horse filling our streets, we've got throngs of people blocking intersections and marching in protest. The roar of this crowd carries a strikingly different weight.
It's for justice, not for joy.
No, we're not celebrating this year, and it doesn't feel like our Derby season. It has nothing to do with fall fashion and "pumpkin spice mint juleps."
The coronavirus and systemic racism have brought our community to a standstill, much like a racetrack after a horse has gone down on the track. This year has sent a painful, strange ripple throughout our city.
Putting on a fascinator and pouring an Oaks Lily this year feels like piling presents under a Christmas tree and baking cookies the first year after a significant death in the family.
I guess all we can do is mark the day in whatever way makes the most sense individually or ignore it, and move on.
Nothing this year feels right. No, it's not beginning to look a lot like Derby, at all.
When I think back to that "What's Wrong" Highlights game I mentioned earlier, you could genuinely do a whole series on everything that looks wrong this year.
There's a virus that's claiming more lives every day and a group of people taking to the streets nightly begging to be heard. Our vibrant restaurant scene is hemorrhaging, and we're clocking more unemployment claims this year than ever before. There are children doing all their schoolwork from their dining room tables, and there are healthcare professionals and grocery store workers, who risk their lives every day by mass exposure to the virus.
"What's Wrong" is about so much more than a new box of crayons near a fascinator in the grocery store.
And it's about so much more than the Kentucky Derby.
Features columnist Maggie Menderski writes about what makes Louisville, Southern Indiana and Kentucky unique, wonderful, and occasionally, a little weird. Say hello at mmenderski@courier-journal.com or 502-582-7137.
Maggie Menderski
Features columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
A boutique with Kentucky-themed items has a store front window at the Brown Hotel on South Fourth Street
$$$
