At protest, mostly white clergy witness righteous anger as an act of love
03 July 2020
On Saturday, June 27, more than 40 (mostly) white clergy – having been asked by protest organizers to be a deescalating presence in the face of a threatened counterprotest by a "patriot militia," calling themselves "American Freedom Fighters" – marched into Jefferson Square Park (known by protesters as "Injustice Square").
As soon as we indicated who we were and that we'd been asked to be a presence, a wall of protesters opened up to admit us. We were escorted by a man who said, "They didn't have to do this; they're here for us."
The expressions of love toward us left some of us in tears.
Our first impression of the protest and the protesters were of love and appreciation. Contrary to the polarizing headline of the article in The Courier Journal, what struck clergy about the protesters as we approached wasn't the fact that some people were armed, but that those gathered enthusiastically embraced clergy as a symbol of the presence of divine peace. To put a finer point on it, most of those we observed at Injustice Square came out in search of justice as a path to peace – responding out of a sense of solidarity to the threat of an armed attack by thinly veiled white supremacy.
As the article correctly notes, some of the "protesters focused their frustrations on the more than two-dozen Louisville Metro Police officers." But what too often gets lost in journalistic accounts of such protests is an adequate appreciation of why that frustration bubbles over onto the nearest available representative of racist systems. One of the reasons for this is that much of white America is unfamiliar with cries of black frustration, anger and grief. In religion, we call this kind of social anguish "communal lament."
Communal lamentation is a very public cry of despair in the face of injustice. It is a way of crying out to God that we can't take any more pain, and we sometimes don't know where to turn or what to do, or even how to put into words the feelings of helplessness we live with every day.
The Hebrew Scriptures offer a model of what it looks like to cry out in pain:
O Lord God of hosts, how long will you be angry with your people's prayers? You have fed them with the bread of tears, and given them tears to drink in full measure. You make us the scorn of our neighbors; our enemies laugh among themselves. Restore us, O God of hosts; let your face shine, that we may be saved (Psalm 80:4–7).
The words of communal lament – the words with which white people need to familiarize ourselves in this dark time — begin with the plea: "How long, O Lord?" – which is a way not only of expressing distress but of being honest about the fact that the world feels too much like God has abandoned those who live with the reality of injustice. So, when the frustrations of BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, People of Color) manifest, it is easier to dismiss them as self-destructive nihilism than the genuine expression of pent-up rage and anguish at the prospect of living in a culture that invents newer and ever-more deadly ways of communicating that your life doesn't matter as much as "ours."
So many people are unfamiliar with the words of communal lament because the communities we inhabit have insulated themselves against the searing cries of our BIPOC neighbors. We've had the "luxury" of ignoring the pleas for justice from those who cannot afford such apathy. We sleep soundly in our homes while the Breonna Taylors of the world have their doors smashed in and are shot in their hallways by 10 deadly bullets.
But white people can no longer afford apathy either – not because people are in danger of protesters with guns, but because people of privilege have a moral responsibility to attend to the desperate appeals for justice and peace from our neighbors who have every reason to believe God has left them holding the bag – or if not God, then the people who so casually claim to be in relationship with God. That's a responsibility that Tyler Gerth took seriously.
White people – that is, people who take for granted the world was constructed with them in mind – need to develop not merely the words of communal lament, but an understanding of why some of our BIPOC know those words only too well. The lack of such an understanding is what prompts us to condemn any reporting that speaks of the manifestations of communal lament without explaining why such action feels necessary to the aggrieved.
The Rev. Derek Penwell is an author, activist, speaker and senior pastor at Douglass Boulevard Christian Church. Other clergy who signed this piece include: The Revs. Ryan Eller, Andrew Kang-Bartlett, Matthew Posten, Ann Diebert, Dawn Cooley, Eva Markham, Shannon Craig-Snell, Dwain Lee, Laura Barclay, Kevin Gardner-Sinclair, Benjamin Hart and Rachel Small Stokes.
Your Turn
Derek Penwell
Guest columnist
$$$
