Protesters hope Derby amplifies message
Gardner, Hayes
31 Aug 2020
Nearly 1,000 protesters chanted in the street after marching to Churchill Downs last week and hanging a Breonna Taylor banner over the venue's sign. It was Aug. 25, the 90th consecutive day of protests in Louisville, 11 days before the 146th Kentucky Derby, and some demonstrators sat in the road, while others stood, as leaders sought to organize the swelling group to continue marching.
Outside of the historic racetrack's facade, one protest leader spun around and weaved through the crowd. He was looking for a megaphone, for a way to amplify his voice.
Discussion of protests outside of Churchill Downs during the Kentucky Derby is not uncommon. In the 1960s and '70s, many movements in Louisville sought to use the Kentucky Derby as a way to heighten their message, when all eyes were on the city for the annual Run for the Roses. But with that national attention comes some hesitancy — how do you pull off a demonstration at a heavily monitored and attended event that many Kentuckians consider sacred?
As University of Louisville historian Tracy K'Meyer has explained in her book "Civil Rights in the Gateway to the South," there is an "inevitable and uniquely Louisville" question that arises with every major social movement in Derby City: "What to do about the Derby?"
The question remains this year, but the hesitancy of the past is nowhere to be found as the Breonna Taylor movement, which has now spanned 95 days, continues to seek recognition and change in Louisville. Protesters, both local and national, are steadfast in saying they will demonstrate at the Kentucky Derby on Saturday, as the longest-running sporting event in the United States meets the most persistent civil rights movement in Louisville in more than 50 years.
For many, the Kentucky Derby is the most regal of events in Louisville. The city's nicknamed for it.
Roughly 15 million viewers tune in on television each year for the fastest two minutes in sports, and the airport's busiest day is the Sunday after the Derby.
But for some protesters — even those who have attended the Derby in the past — it represents an ostentatious event of luxury that distracts from what they have been protesting for three months: racial equality, especially as it relates to the treatment of Black people by police.
Protester Carmen Jones used to live off Rodman Street, just blocks from Churchill Downs in southern Louisville, and she would park cars to make extra money during the Derby. But she doesn't revere the event, and she sees a clear dichotomy in the grandiose nature of it and the impoverished area that surrounds the track.
"Every single resource and ounce of money that y'all use to put on these events can be used to better the hood and can be used to fix situations and to fix the system that allowed for Breonna to die in the first place," Jones said.
Churchill Downs, of course, has no control or say in the Taylor case; it's a racetrack, not a courthouse. But for protesters, Kentucky's most lavish event also offers a unique opportunity to make noise and garner attention, an essential part of the movement. Demonstrators have been marching for nearly 100 days, and national eyes are on Louisville, but the Derby provides an increased level of awareness.
"Is there anything in Louisville that gets more publicity than the Kentucky Derby? Ever?" K'Meyer, the historian, said. "It's two minutes a year when TV stations 'round the country are tuned into what's going on in Louisville. So in terms of a place to draw attention to something, it's almost ideal."
That platform for amplification is what has attracted protesters to the event in the past, although not without hesitation.
Open accommodation protesters demonstrated in the weeks before and after the 1961 Kentucky Derby — but not at it. Open housing advocates protested so much in April 1967 that the Kentucky Derby Festival Pegasus Parade was canceled, and there were some suggestions to thwart a smooth Derby by very slowly driving on interstates to create traffic. Sabotaging the television broadcast was even discussed.
But Martin Luther King Jr. ultimately called off protests at what would be the final Derby of his lifetime at the eleventh hour, on the morning of the race, over concerns that a large demonstration could be viewed as "disruption for its own sake," as K'Meyer put it, and that it could generate violence between protesters and attendees.
In 1969, some Louisville students protested for racial equality outside of Churchill Downs, but without huge attention, and in 1976, there were plans to have as many as 5,000 anti-busing protesters present, in part to chant, "Stop the busing and we'll stop fussing," after the playing of "My Old Kentucky Home," but that never came to fruition.
This year, however, Taylor demonstrators are confident that the Run for the Roses will feature a protest for the people.
"You're gonna see something happen on Derby that you've never seen ever before when it comes to Louisville, Kentucky, and that's what you call strength in numbers," local protest leader Chris Wells said.
The Not F***ing Around Coalition, a Black militia that visited Louisville in July with more than 300 armed members and a threatening message, has stated it will be in Louisville on Derby Day, and Until Freedom — which organized the sit-in on Attorney General Daniel Cameron's lawn and the recent march to Churchill Downs, leading to more than 150 combined arrests — will also be in town.
Co-founder Linda Sarsour said her organization is strategizing with local groups, and the Rev. Stephen Green, an activist pastor who works closely with Until Freedom, has said that action led by the group may lead to "mass arrests," once again.
"On Derby Day, I think it will be a large-scale mobilization that will continue to lift up the pursuit of justice of Breonna Taylor," Green said, "and also show the city that we are sick and tired of business as usual, and going back to the way things used to be is no longer an option."
Protesters have marched, without significant change, for an entire season: each day in June, in July, and soon, August.
They're upset, and they're angry, and they feel muted. They feel unheard.
At the Derby, they hope to find their megaphone.
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Protesters gather on Central Avenue in front of Churchill Downs on Tuesday as they protest the killing of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police officers.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Protesters sit in the middle of Central Avenue in front of Churchill Downs on Tuesday.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Protesters march past Churchill Downs on Central Avenue as they protest the killing of Taylor by LMPD.
Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
$$$
