McConnell: Statues treated 'like they were Saddam Hussein'
Aulbach, Lucas
24 June 2020
Enough with being "politically correct," Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday. Crowds around the nation that have attacked statues — including those of George Washington and Thomas Jefferson — have gone too far.
"A crazy fringe is treating their monuments like vanity statues of tinhorn tyrants," McConnell said from the Senate floor. "Our Founding Fathers are being roped to the ground like they were Saddam Hussein."
The protests against racism and police brutality following the killings of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor have put sculptures and other displays honoring notable figures in American history in the spotlight.
Some have been torn down. A statue of Thomas Jefferson was pulled down last week in Portland, Oregon, and George Washington statues were in Portland and in Washington, D.C.
In Kentucky, McConnell's home state, a statue of Confederate President Jefferson Davis was taken out of the state Capitol this month, while a statue of former Confederate Gen. John B. Castleman (who was a key figure in establishing Louisville's parks system) was removed following years of controversy.
McConnell had previously spoken out against the Davis statue, saying in 2015 that it would be "more appropriate" to display in a museum.
McConnell did not make any references to the Confederacy during his nearly 9-minute address, other than to say those who had tried to pull down a statue of Ulysses S. Grant — who led the Union Army to victory in the Civil War — had "literally tried to succeed where Robert E. Lee failed and bring General Grant to the ground."
Instead, he tore into actions that have been taken against statues of other historical figures, including Grant, a former president along with Jefferson and Washington, and St. Junipero Serra. Those three former presidents owned slaves, a fact that has been brought back into the light amid the current political climate, and Serra was the principle founder of a California mission system that exploited Indigenous people in the region during the 1800s.
"The United States of America can and should have nuanced conversations about our complex past. We can and should have discussions about our future. We can and should have peaceful protests," McConnell said, blaming "far-left radicals" for the destruction. "But this lawlessness serves none of that. It's just an alliance of convenience between angry criminals who think it's fun to wreak havoc and a slice of elite society that profits off saying our country is evil and deserves the abuse."
While he'd previously spoken out against Kentucky's Jefferson Davis statue, McConnell last week stood against efforts to remove Confederate statues from the U.S. Capitol building, calling an effort by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to remove 11 sculptures with Confederate ties "nonsense" and an effort to "airbrush the Capitol and scrub out everybody from years ago who had any connection to slavery."
Each state has two statues in the National Statuary Hall Collection. Kentucky's statues honor former Sen. Henry Clay and physician Ephraim McDowell, and neither have faced calls for removal.
McConnell will be on the ballot in Kentucky in November. Primary voters in the Bluegrass State were at the polls on Tuesday to choose his Democratic challenger in a race between Charles Booker, Mike Broihier and Amy McGrath. The winner is expected to be announced June 30.
$$$
