A newsletter that takes you beyond the headlines
Duvall, Tessa; Costello, Darcy
31 Aug 2020
The call came around 3 p.m. May 28.
An attorney for Breonna Taylor's family told The Courier Journal he'd just gotten a vital piece of evidence: The 911 call Taylor's boyfriend made minutes after police shot her in her apartment.
That's when we heard Kenny Walker tell a 911 dispatcher what has been repeated in dozens of news reports since: "Somebody kicked in the door and shot my girlfriend."
Soon after our story went online, Mayor Greg Fischer publicly released the 911 call and others from the night of Taylor's death. Within hours, hundreds of protesters marched on downtown Louisville's streets, blocking traffic and chanting Taylor's name.
Before the night was over, police fired pepper balls and chemical agents into the crowd and people marched en masse, some later going on to shatter glass storefronts and smash nearby cars. At least seven people were shot, with no suspect found.
Taylor's story has drawn attention, with people craving more information on what happened and why an unarmed Black woman was shot dead by police in her home.
That's why we are launching a newsletter to take you beyond the headlines on all things Taylor, with exclusive, enterprising content.
Starting next week, The Breonna Taylor Case will provide a roundup of the most important events and stories about her story and the surrounding protests — with insights and analysis.
Protesters have demanded the officers involved in her shooting be fired, arrested and prosecuted — calls amplified by national figures.
Through it all, questions remain about why police were at Taylor's apartment and what happened after they broke down the door, armed with a "no-knock" search warrant.
The warrant indicates police were searching for drugs and cash as part of a larger narcotics investigation, saying they believed Taylor had been receiving suspicious packages.
But lawyers for Taylor's family say those suspicions were false, and they have called into question why police even needed to be at her apartment, saying officers knew their main suspect in the investigation — Taylor's ex-boyfriend — was elsewhere.
Police have said Walker, her current boyfriend, who was at the apartment that night, fired a shot as officers broke down her door, striking Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. Walker told police in a recorded interview hours later that he had fired a warning shot at what he thought they were intruders.
Officers returned fire — spraying Taylor's apartment with bullets. Five of them hit Taylor, and she died in her apartment hallway.
Since then, detective Brett Hankison has been fired from the police force, while the other two to fire their weapons at the apartment, Mattingly and detective Myles Cosgrove, remain on administrative reassignment.
A fourth officer who requested all five warrants for that night, detective Joshua Jaynes, has also been reassigned.
But key questions remain: What were the details of the narcotics investigation centered more than 10 miles away that led police to Taylor's door? Was it connected to a redevelopment plan in the Russell neighborhood as lawyers for Taylor's family have alleged? And who fired the bullets that killed her?
The city and the nation are waiting impatiently for an announcement from Attorney General Daniel Cameron, whose investigation into her death has dragged on since LMPD turned over its case file to the agency on May 20 — a case file The Courier Journal is suing to make public.
It's not clear when Cameron will make his decision. But even when he does, the story won't be done.
We don't know all the ways in which Taylor's legacy will change Louisville. But we do know that through it all, we'll be reporting.
To sign up for The Breonna Taylor Case newsletter head to courierjournal.com or visit https://bit.ly/3hCKhUb.
Taylor
$$$
