A search for answers
Kachmar, Kala
04 June 2020
David McAtee was carrying a gun to protect his business, which doubled as his home, the night he was fatally shot by police at his West End barbecue stand, said his nephew, who was there the night his uncle died.
But David would never fire at police, his nephew, Marvin McAtee, told The Courier Journal on Wednesday.
Instead, the nephew said he and David thought they were being looted when several people suddenly rushed in through the shop's open door at 12:15a.m. Monday.
"He's been friends with the law so long; he doesn't have to worry about that part of it," Marvin said of the man he considered his brother because they were raised together.
David's fatal shooting Monday at the hands of authorities continues to raise troubling questions about the sequence of events that led to his death, inflaming some who are already angry about the fatal police shooting of unarmed Breonna Taylor in March.
Three central questions are emerging:
Did David shoot first at Louisville police officers and National Guard troops before they fired at least 18 shots, including one that struck David in the chest and killed him in his shop?
If David did fire, what prompted him to pull the trigger?
And at whom or what was the 53-year-old aiming?
Police, National Guard arrive Around midnight Monday, dozens of police and National Guard deployed to 26th and Broadway to break up a crowd there. They arrived about three hours after a curfew went into effect because of nightly protests that had at times become violent downtown.
Police initially said someone fired in the crowd fired at police, and two officers and two Guard troops returned fire, killing David.
On Monday and Tuesday, Louisville Metro Police released video footage from two street cameras operated by LMPD's Real Time Crime Center. One was from inside David's barbecue business; the other from the outside camera of an adjoining business showing an apparent confrontation between police and David.
At a press conference Tuesday, interim Police Chief Rob Schroeder said the video appears to show David firing a gun outside his door as officers are shooting pepper balls to clear people from the area.
On Wednesday, Schroeder said authorities do not know if David was targeting police.
"We do not know what he was shooting at," Schroeder said. "That is something that the investigation will have to reveal."
But none of the camera footage actually shows David firing a gun. A doorway blocks the view of his raised hand in one video. And an open door obscures him in another.
The videos do show a gun dropping to the ground as David stumbles into the barbecue shed and falls after apparently being struck by a bullet in the chest.
The two LMPD officers involved in the shooting were not wearing or did not activate body cameras, which Mayor Greg Fischer on Monday called an "institutional failure" that resulted in him firing Chief Steve Conrad.
A flurry of pepper balls In the outdoor surveillance video, people can be seen standing around the street and sidewalk area near the barbecue takeout tent before suddenly running through David's open door when an officer fires pepper balls at them.
Marvin said a cousin was at the door and wasn't able to stop the people from rushing inside, where only friends and family are allowed.
She was hit with a pepper ball in the doorway, he said, which can be seen on video.
"(David) reached out there to grab her when they were shooting her," he said. "He was protecting her right then and there."
Marvin said he did not see David fire a weapon because he was busy making sure the people who ran in didn't go down to David's basement apartment.
But if David did fire, it would have been to scare anyone else off from running in or shooting at them, Marvin said.
Video footage shows David with his hand around a dark, cylindrical object on his right hip while in the doorway during the chaos. He can be seen raising his right hand out the door, briefly, before the doorway obscures his arm.
There was also loud music playing, Marvin said. A speaker can be seen just inside the entrance of the door.
When Marvin realized they were being shot at, he didn't know they were pepper balls. He said he heard them getting closer, and they kept shooting.
"They hit my car like three or four times," he said.
Video raises questions Marvin said there's no way David knew there were police outside his door, especially from his the doorway.
"You cannot see Dino's and the parking lot until you fully come out and engage it," he said. Marvin said the police and National Guard made a mistake and should apologize.
"It was dumb (of police) to start shooting when you see another business over here that has nothing to do with Dino's (the business next door to YaYa's BBQ) — period."
Marvin said officers, who often ate at the barbecue shop, came in two days before the shooting to eat and advised David to get a gun because of the destruction associated with protesters.
"That's the kind of relationship he had with them," Marvin said. "He has so much loyalty and respect for the police."
Odessa Riley, David's mother, has hired a lawyer. No lawsuit has been filed, according to the Louisville attorney, Steve Romines.
"The small snippet of video released raises more questions than it answers," Romines said in a statement.
"More importantly, the video released is from David's own surveillance camera, but there is no video from the 20 or so officers who were ordered to have body cams operational."
"Left to pick up the pieces": Louisville business owners angry with response to looting. Metro, 3A
Siblings Jamie McAtee, left, and Addie McAtee grieve during a vigil for their brother, David McAtee, on the day after his death from gunfire during a confrontation with police and the National Guard.
$$$
