Supporting Louisville's Black community from within
26 July 2020
"When I see people on the streets, I just want to help them."
Taylor Ryan
Taylor Ryan steps out of her car carrying several small brown bags.
Each is filled with supplies for Louisville's homeless: toothbrushes, shampoo, socks, food.
She passes the bags out quickly to a group that's been staying beneath an Interstate 65 overpass. She doesn't know any of their names. But after making these deliveries regularly for months, she knows their faces, and they know hers.
"You hungry, baby?" she asks.
They always are, and Ryan is happy to feed them.
It's the first step toward gaining the individuals' trust, learning what they need and determining how her nonprofit, Change Today, Change Tomorrow, can provide it.
The organization is young. It won't celebrate its first anniversary until September. But Ryan and a board of six other Black women have big plans for its future — and they're already well on their way to becoming a pillar for Louisville's marginalized communities.
Together, the women have launched half a dozen initiatives that provide resources for teachers, transgender residents and people struggling with poor health.
They've started funding campaigns to support a Black-owned grocery store, Black artists and protesters who've been calling for justice for Breonna Taylor.
And after one of the West End's few grocery stores closed temporarily, they distributed free food to more than 12,000 families through the #FeedtheWest program.
It's all work that aligns with Louisville's current movement for racial justice, which took root after the fatal police shooting of Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed March 13 during a failed narcotics investigation at her Louisville apartment.
The nonprofit's leaders aren't out marching in nightly protests, Ryan said. But they're contributing to the cause by supporting Black communities from within.
"It's very important just to know that it's all community-led, that we're not some big corporate organization who has just come in and infiltrated someone's neighborhood," Ryan said.
"I think it's important to know we are of the neighborhood."
Ryan, 29, grew up poor in Paducah, Kentucky, and has always been the first to offer help to people in need, even when her family didn't have much to give.
She began doing service work as a teen and entered the nonprofit sector after earning degrees in communication from the University of Louisville and in adult education from Marshall University in West Virginia.
"It's like a natural drive," she said. "When I see people on the street, I just want to help them. It's definitely not for the money. I have two master's degrees, and before I started my own organization, I never made more than $12 an hour."
Ryan said despite her education and experience, she found it difficult to get hired at some established nonprofits. So she started Change Today, Change Tomorrow as a way to create an avenue for herself into the field.
In the past two months alone, the group has raised more than $200,000 from small donations contributed mostly through money-transferring apps and from such larger donors as the Community Foundation of Louisville.
Now, she's hired three employees and has begun leasing an office space in Butchertown.
She's been able to take a salary to support herself and her 2-year-old son. And she thinks there's a good chance that Change Today could hit $1 million in donations and grants before the year's end.
"I'm trying to manifest that," Ryan said of the funding target. "I'm turning 30 on Dec. 17, and that's my goal."
For that to happen, Ryan and her board members said, elected officials, businesses and everyday people will have to continue supporting Black-led initiatives, even after the visible protests end.
"I think people are showing up," said Nannie Croney, president of Change Today, Change Tomorrow's board. "... We're seeing the shift of dollars going into Black businesses, white people showing up in Black neighborhoods. We're seeing white people finally listen, like 'how can I help, what can I do?'
"Historically, that's all we've been asking for. We've been asking for actions to match words."
Reach reporter Bailey
Loosemore at bloosemore@
courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore.
Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-
journal.com/baileyl.
"When I see people on the streets, I just want to help them."
Taylor Ryan
Taylor Ryan, founder of Change Today, Change Tomorrow, helps prepare bags of supplies as part of the nonprofit's homeless outreach.
$$$
