10 new Black-owned restaurants that opened this year
23 Sep 2020
Opening a restaurant is a difficult, expensive endeavor. Opening a restaurant during a pandemic and amid one of the largest social justice movements the U.S. has seen is a whole different game.
Since the protests in Louisville began more than 100 days ago over the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was shot and killed by Louisville police inside her home in March, Black-owned businesses have been thrust into the spotlight as customers searched for ways to support Louisville's Black community.
And that spotlight has brought to attention the historical inequalities facing many of Louisville's Black business owners.
According to Louisville Forward, the city's economic development agency, 2.4% of the city's businesses are Black-owned, though Black people make up 23.5% of the city's population.
The city of Louisville has begun taking small steps to rectify this. Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer signed an executive order last week to create a task force focused on supporting Black-owned and minority-, female- and disabled-owned businesses. On Sept. 10, the Fund for the Arts pledged $131,000 in support in the form of two new grants: the Black Artists Fund Grants and the COVID-19 Relief Grants for Black-owned Restaurants. But there's still a long way to go.
Tanika Bryant, the executive director of the nonprofit Black Business Association in Louisville, said in a previous interview the protests have generated more support for the organization's Buy Black Lou Initiative, designed to support Black-owned businesses.
That's My Dog owner Thomas Harris said he's noticed many new customers stopping into his Jeffersonville, Indiana, restaurant wanting to support a Black-owned business.
"I'm fortunate they have come and it's important because I'm Black-owned, but more or less I want to be supported because it's a business they want to enjoy," he said. "Hopefully they return not just because I'm Black, but because the food and service is above standard."
Other Black business owners, like Erica Hector, are grateful, no matter the intention of customers seeking out her doughnut shop, Stacey's Donuts.
"Whether they are coming out for personal gain or because they feel for what's going on, it's a huge win for Black business owners," she said. "It lets us know that it really is 'Together, Kentucky.'"
There are more than 80 Black-owned restaurants in Louisville, and the list is growing constantly. Here's a highlight reel in alphabetical order of 10 new Black-owned restaurants that have opened this year.
Barry's Cheesesteaks Opened in March. 2500 Bardstown Road; 502-384-2430; barryscheesesteaks.com
Former pastor Barry Washington has run Barry's Cheesesteaks in Louisville for five years, using the restaurant as a way to give back to the community. He has become well-known for his big heart and classic Philly-style cheesesteaks. But 2020 has not gone quite the way Washington planned.
His original restaurant on Preston Highway closed in early January, leaving just the location at 1161 Second St. in operation. On March 10, Washington opened a new Barry's Cheesesteaks at 2500 Bardstown Road — and a week later, restaurants were mandated to close due to the coronavirus pandemic. After a summer bleeding finances due to lost sales, Washington suffered another blow in August when he was hospitalized for nearly two weeks with congestive heart failure.
Now he's not sure how much longer he can keep going, even with dedicated fans buying cheesesteaks and "sending prayers from different states."
"We still gotta fight through it," Washington said. "Even through this. I gotta be here to lift someone else up and help encourage them."
The Black Italian Opened in February. 2009 Highland Ave.; 502-690-8914; theblackitalian.com
This restaurant began as a catering company in 2009 that finally opened a restaurant in February. It was born out of a husband-and-wife duo partnership: Anthony Hunter, a Black man, and his wife Paula Belleza Hunter, an Italian woman. They describe the concept as "Italian with a touch of soul," with the recipes from Paula's hand, topped with grilled meats from Anthony.
"The most popular dish is the creamy garlic formaggio with added grilled chicken," Paula said. "And we can never make enough flame-grilled marinated chicken wings or meatballs. That's another soul food part of it."
She said because the restaurant is fast-casual, it was able to stay open for carryout during the restaurant shut down, and support from the Black-owned business community has been helpful. The restaurant in the Highlands is working to launch online ordering soon.
"Catering is picking back up, and we're trying to expand our hours to stay open, but we need to train more people," Paula said. "It's really busy – it's a blessing, but challenging as well."
Eden & Kissi 3912 Bardstown Road; 502-384-9102; Facebook.com/EdenandKissi.
This Afro-Caribbean restaurant opened on Bardstown Road in January under the radar, owned by Kissi Gnamba and her son. They make classic Caribbean dishes like jerk chicken, chicken curry, pineapple shrimp and chicken, oxtail, yussa, beef patties and fried plantains. The takeout restaurant also serves hibiscus mango and lemon ginger drinks, which Gnamba said is selling pretty well during the pandemic.
But in general, business at Eden & Kissi has been quiet since the pandemic began, she said.
"Every day is different," Gnamba said. "Sometimes we sell a lot of jerk chicken. Today I'm almost sold out of curry. Our No. 1 seller is the fully loaded jerk chicken pita. It's a mixture of jerk chicken, some fried plantain, pico de gallo. People love it."
Fleur de Tea Projected to open in November. 10704 Meeting St.; Facebook.com/fleur-de-tea
Jasmine Gatti, 29, has always had to go to Asian restaurants when she wants to grab a bubble tea. That's where the idea began to start her own tea shop. Now, it's happening: she's leaving her job as a clinical technician in optometry to open Fleur de Tea in Norton Commons. The 1,100-square-foot tea shop will have a comfortable, relaxed vibe, she said, and will serve about 20 kinds of tea, bubble tea, a few coffees and desserts like scones, fruit tarts and parfaits.
"I definitely don't want this to be a place you grab your drink and go," Gatti said. "I want you to be able to come here and relax, play some games and enjoy yourselves with your friends or family."
Fleur de Tea will open in November, with hours yet to be announced.
The Funky Waffle Co. Opened in August. 1410 Charlestown-New Albany Road, Jeffersonville, Indiana
A Belgian waffle and dessert shop opened in Jeffersonville, Indiana, in August, and it's loaded with goodies. Owner André Brown runs the shop with his family and makes authentic waffles with pearl sugar imported from Belgium. Guests can get made-to-order Belgian waffles with 30 topping choices and Belgian waffle sundaes as well as homemade cheesecake, banana pudding, brownies and cupcakes.
There are waffles topped with fruit and whipped cream, waffles topped with extra desserts and 10 waffle sundaes. The most popular item on the menu is the "Rockin' Reese's" waffle sundae, served with Reese's peanut butter cups, chocolate sauce and whipped cream.
"We use chunks of sugar imported from Belgium called pearl sugar, so it melts and caramelizes as the waffle cooks," Brown said. "It's not your typical pancake waffle. A lot of people say they could eat the waffle by itself, it's so sweet."
The Funky Waffle Co. is open Tuesday to Thursday 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Friday and Saturday 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. and Sunday 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. The shop is closed on Mondays.
Philly's Best Frozen Desserts Opened in June. 3912 Bardstown Road; 502-996-0640; Facebook.com/phillysbestfrozendessertsky
Rodney Daisy is from Philadelphia, where the "staple frozen treat" is Italian water ice. After years of his kids asking for it here in Louisville, he decided to open his own business, bit by bit. In fall 2018, Daisy started operating out of the kitchen incubator Chef Space at 1812 W. Muhammad Ali Blvd. to perfect his recipe. He began setting up grab-and-go freezers at convenience stores, then branched out to a mobile food truck.
In June, his restaurant opened at 3912 Bardstown Road, selling 15 flavors of Italian water ice, which Daisy describes as a smoother, creamier version of shaved ice. The shop also serves gelati, or a cup of vanilla bean ice cream layered with your choice of water ice flavor. There are flavors like strawberry, blue raspberry, lemon and even Swedish red fish candy-flavored water ice. So far business has been decent due to good word-of-mouth. The best thing about it has been fellow Philadelphians stopping by.
"A couple guys came in yesterday with Philadelphia Eagles shirts on," Daisy said. "They just told me, 'You got a new friend.'"
Pollo Opened in July. 1991 Brownsboro Road; 502-742-4596; Facebook.com/pollolouisville
A longstanding chicken food truck put down roots in the Clifton neighborhood this year. Owned by Troy King and his wife Selena Johnson, Pollo opened at 1991 Brownsboro Road in July. The couple also owns Six Forks Burger Co., which opened last August.
Pollo serves both fried and roast chicken, as well as sides like mac and cheese, Kool-Aid and slices of cake from The Celtic Pig.
Most places do "fried chicken, three-piece with a biscuit or wings," King said. But Pollo is "not the typical chicken restaurant."
"We take fried chicken and roast chicken and turn it into things, like quesadillas, gyros and tacos," he said. "We're even going to dabble in some fried chicken sushi. We basically take chicken and use it as a vehicle to create other dishes."
Ricky B's Club Cafe
Opened in July. 2901 Brownsboro Road; 502-333-0110; rbclub.cafe
Ricky Bartlett has been playing the piano and singing at Louisville restaurants for years. In July, he began playing at his own restaurant, when his dream supper club opened at 2901 Brownsboro Road. Ricky B's Club Cafe is meant to be a place for socialization, entertainment and food pulled from many cultures.
"We call it a world fusion supper club because in the menu, we're going to always look for flavors and spices and things from around the world," Bartlett said.
Bartlett said his favorite item is the Ricky B's Bouncin' Back Burger, inspired by the song "Bouncin' Back" by rapper Mystikal. According to Bartlett, he came up with the Bouncin' Back Burger before the coronavirus struck the United States. And upon opening the restaurant, the menu item "became even more appropriate for this time," Bartlett said.
Stacey's Donuts Opened in January. 12907 Factory Lane; 502-409-8825; Facebook.com/www.staceysdonuts/
Last year, Erica Hector worked at a donut shop called State Donuts, run by Stacey Trieu. After Trieu died in October 2019, Hector took over the doughnut shop, renaming it in honor of Stacey. The new shop opened in January — and it's been exploding in popularity ever since, skyrocketing from 60 to 7,100 followers on Facebook.
Deliveries during the spring COVID-19 restaurant shutdown saved the business, Hector said. Stacey's Donuts has just three employees at the moment, so deliveries are on hold until winter. The business has been crazy busy, she said, and the shop makes anywhere from 2,250 to 3,000 doughnuts a week, with the busiest hours between 7 and 9 a.m. A dozen doughnuts is just $10.25, with the most popular being the classic glazed and chocolate glazed.
"I've never seen so many supportive people," Hector said. "It touches my heart because we're in the middle of a virus pandemic and a racial pandemic, and they're so supportive."
That's My Dog Opened in July. 125 W. Chestnut St., Jeffersonville, Indiana. 812-725-8242; thatsmydogllc.com
At the base of the Big 4 Walking Bridge in Jeffersonville, Indiana, a new hot dog restaurant opened just in time for the Fourth of July weekend. Owner Thomas Harris said he has long dreamed of owning a restaurant and working for himself.
That's My Dog serves all-beef hot dogs, brats, sausages, corndogs, funnel cake fries and onion rings. Harris said the two most popular items are "The Boss Lady," a quarter-pound Angus beef frank topped with chili, cheddar cheese and white onions, and "The Clasic," a quarter-pound Angus beef dog topped with sweet relish, mustard and ketchup.
"The next most popular ones are the Philly steak dog and the Chicago dog," Harris said. "I had some people from Chicago tell me it's the best Chicago dog south of Chicago. All these comments — it feels amazing for a dream of mine to come true and it's reaffirmed every day."
The location is kid- and pet-friendly and donates a portion of sales from its monthly special to JB Ogle Animal Shelter and Southern Indiana Animal Rescue per month.
Dahlia Ghabour: 502-582-4497; dghabour@gannett.com; Twitter: @dghabour. Support strong journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe
Food & Dining
Dahlia Ghabour
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
The "Straight Up Strawberry" waffle sundae pictured with chocolate ice cream, strawberries, white chocolate chips, strawberry sauce and chocolate sauce.
The Funky Waffle Co.
That's My Dog opened in Jeffersonville, Indiana in July.
That's My Dog
Rick Bartlett, 66, stands in front of his restaurant, Rick B's Club Cafe, at 2901 Brownsboro Road.
Courtesy of Rick Bartlett
Jasmine Gatti is opening a bubble tea shop in Norton Commons.
Jasmine Gatti
A jerk chicken meal at Eden & Kissi.
Eden & Kissi
$$$
