Fear and loathing amid COVID-19, racism
27 Sep 2020
I wonder what Hunter Thompson would say about the "perfect storm" we have here?
Between opposing views over the role of the police in the death of Breonna Taylor, wildly diverging views on the government response to COVID-19 and the contentious November elections, about the only thing I can say is that I wish I had bought a liquor store in January. I can't drink because of my kidney disease, but there's nothing wrong with supporting the local economy with an "essential product"! (That's controversial in itself. At least capitalism is still legal.)
Truthfully, the angst around COVID has affected me the most. I have been unable to touch my 95-year-old mother since March 10. Until three weeks ago, I had to visit through a window but now five patients have died and others are testing positive for COVID so she is confined to her room. As that faces a courtyard, I have no access. Obviously, I am unable to even SEE her, just telephone. It is just a daily torment.
COVID has altered the work environment for my three sons and their families. My oldest son is married to a palliative care physician so she has been giving us front-line accounts. Two of my sons have children in school so they have been scrambling to make decisions about that issue. Because the grands are in Ohio and Texas, I am unable to help in person. Fortunately, I can FaceTime and ship them things. It doesn't feel like enough.
In terms of the election, I have campaigned via telephone for my state representative in her effort to be reelected. Many prospective voters seem surprised when I say I know her. But I do know her, and I know my state senator and my city council member. I am grateful to these three women for taking on these demanding jobs. Thank you, Tina, Julie and Paula!
When it comes to the catastrophe surrounding the death of Breonna Taylor, at times it seems that all I can do is say her name in prayer. I can do that. My priest, Matt, has set up a shrine for her near our parish altar. When I watch Mass most days on FaceTime, it is unavoidable, as it should be.
I have had to essentially leave Facebook because of the racist comments. I have had at least four people say to me privately that her death has brought out some of their worst instincts and reactions. That last piece has, however, taken up most of my emotional energy. How do you respond when someone says her death has made them MORE racist? How in the world did she deserve to die?
I've learned it is incredibly difficult for my Black friends to talk about all of this. I'm glad to say I know Lonita Baker and Sadiqa Reynolds. I appreciate their struggle more than many.
Talking to one Black friend made me wrestle with the memories of what is was like to speak to the Texas Medical Association and TV reporters about my friends and clients who were dying with AIDS when I worked with the Capital Area AIDS Legal Project in Austin. Some folks thought I was radioactive for admitting I was gay. That was back when some thought GAY stood for Got AIDS Yet? There were an awful lot of folks in the gay community who were just angry at everyone and everything. Dr. Fauci was a villain then to many gay activists who thought he was delaying finding a treatment. I stopped counting after going to my 50th funeral. Please don't throw up "Black on Black" crime to me. It sounds just like "You deserve to die for having sex with another man."
At the end of the day, hate is still hate, regardless of the skin colors involved or past boyfriends.
The only thing I have any power over is how I react to all of these situations. I can give in to despair and view myself as a victim, and that most likely means being sad, mad and scared. Or I can accept that I am not in charge. I can choose to take a moral stand. I believe racism is wrong. I believe in human dignity. I choose to go forward with acceptance and love. My decision has nothing to do with who wins the election. Or what eventually happens with regard to police reform or a COVID vaccine.
I cannot control other people. But I can refuse to allow myself to judge and hate. It's not pie in the sky. It's a responsibility. Make a choice not to give hate or fear "free parking" in your head.
Bruce Kleinschmidt is an attorney and advocate for diversity and inclusion.
Your Turn
Bruce Kleinschmidt
Guest columnist
Lura Frye, a University of Louisville medical student, wears a mask that says "say her name" in Jefferson Square Park during a protest in June.
$$$
