Family vows to fight injustice for McAtee
Loosemore, Bailey
"It's moments like these that feel like hate has won." But "our responsibility will be to continue to fight, to continue to pass and push his legacy and make sure that his death was not in vain."
The Rev. Timothy Findley Jr., Kingdom Fellowship Church during McAtee's funeral at Canaan Christian Church
June 1 may have marked the end of David McAtee's life, but Saturday signaled a beginning for his family and friends, who have vowed to fight systemic injustices they say led law enforcement to kill yet another Black man.
"It's moments like these that feel like hate has won," the Rev. Timothy Findley Jr. of Kingdom Fellowship Church said during McAtee's funeral at Canaan Christian Church. But "our responsibility will be to continue to fight, to continue to pass and push his legacy and make sure that his death was not in vain."
McAtee, 53, died after a Kentucky National Guard member shot the restaurant owner at his business in the Russell neighborhood.
Louisville Metro Police and the guard were there to disperse a crowd that had gathered after curfew in a parking lot at 26th and Broadway. The curfew was in place because of protests — some of which were marred by looting and property damage — over the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed in her South End apartment.
Police and state officials say McAtee fired at least two rounds from a handgun at officers before they returned fire, hitting McAtee once in the chest. But an attorney for McAtee's family and witnesses who were there the night he died say he would never have fired at police.
"If this particular instance looks like another occasion of wrong place at the wrong time, in this instance, it wasn't the victim that was in the wrong place," the Rev. Mario Martin of Praise Nation Church said during Saturday's service.
McAtee died, Martin said, while he was trying to protect his niece and others from officers who were shooting them with pepper bullets.
"At this time, when the enemy wants to do nothing but separate us and cause division, let us remember the last few moments of Mr. McAtee's life were keeping people together," Martin said. "And at the end of the day, let's remember to stay together."
On Saturday, several funeralgoers touched McAtee's chest as he lay in an open casket just below the pulpit.
Before they took their seats, they paused to stroke his face and hold his hand, whispering last messages and wiping tears from their cheeks.
"I love you. I love you, David," one woman called out as McAtee's casket was closed.
For more than 90 minutes, Martin and other speakers told of McAtee's generosity, of the soul he put into his cooking and of the profound impact he had on the community he so deeply loved.
"I don't know any act of kindness as powerful as making something with your hands and sharing it with your brothers and sisters in need," said restaurateur Edward Lee, who announced that he will open McAtee Community Kitchen in the late chef's honor.
"I promise you that I will honor the legacy of chef McAtee," he said. "I wish that he was here right now to know that his life has inspired me."
The Rev. Kevin Cosby of St. Stephen Church said McAtee's death must remind everyone that "life is short, and whatever impact we're going to make, we need to make it now."
"This was a bad event," Cosby said. "It was bad. But the world turns, and the sun will shine again. And when the world turns and a new day has dawned, it will be a better day not only for our community, but for the nation."
"It's moments like these that feel like hate has won." But "our responsibility will be to continue to fight, to continue to pass and push his legacy and make sure that his death was not in vain."
The Rev. Timothy Findley Jr., Kingdom Fellowship Church during McAtee's funeral at Canaan Christian Church
David McAtee is placed in a hearse following his eulogy at Canaan Christian Church on Saturday afternoon.
Photos by Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
The Slate Sisters perform during the funeral. McAtee was fatally shot by a National Guard officer in the early hours of June 1 in Louisville's West End.
Zakeyion "Gus" Anderson sings during the funeral. McAtee was the popular owner of a West End barbecue stand, YaYa's BBQ.
$$$
