State Rep. Attica Scott says arrest on felony rioting charge 'absurd'
Sonka, Joe
26 Sep 2020
Less than a day after being arrested on a felony rioting charge that she called "ridiculous" and "absurd," state Rep. Attica Scott was back in the streets of Louisville, advocating for justice for Breonna Taylor.
A few hours after being released, she spoke during a Friday morning press conference held downtown by Taylor's family and attorneys, receiving cheers as she promised to fight for the passage of Breonna's Law in the state legislature.
By that evening, Scott had returned to Jefferson Square Park to participate in the night's marches, along with hundreds of other protesters.
Scott was detained by Louisville police officers Thursday night shortly before the city's 9 p.m. curfew as she was trying to cross the street to a Unitarian church giving sanctuary to numerous protesters.
She and hundreds of others in downtown Louisville were protesting a grand jury's decision Wednesday to not indict any officers for shooting into Taylor's home on March 13 and killing her.
Scott, her daughter, Ashanti Scott, and prominent racial justice activist Shameka Parrish-Wright were arrested together, all charged with two misdemeanor counts of unlawful assembly and failure to disperse, in addition to first-degree rioting, a Class D felony.
Scott told The Courier Journal shortly after her release early Friday morning that she believes she and Parrish-Wright were specifically targeted by police because of their outspoken activism.
Her arrest citation claims Scott was "part of a larger group that was given ... order verbally to disperse and failed to do so," adding that "subjects caused extensive damage at multiple locations including setting fire to the Louisville Public Library."
A statement from an LMPD spokesman Thursday night indicated that 24 protesters were arrested and said some had damaged property nearby, including TARC buses at Brook Street, and some attempted "to start a fire" at the library.
However, Scott notes that she was livestreaming video in the eight minutes leading up to their encounter with police as they attempted to cross York Street and enter church property and that the video shows no evidence of any vandalism or arson as they passed the downtown branch of the library.
Scott said she was "disgusted and offended" at the LMPD's accusation that she would try to burn down the library in the district she represents.
"The main library is in my District 41 – what I have done nothing but fight for in Frankfort and try to get funding for – and you're going to accuse me of trying to set fire to it?" Scott asked. "That's ridiculous. It's absurd."
Scott said she was detained by officers two minutes before the city's 9 p.m. curfew when they blocked her path to cross the street to the church and then encircled her and others.
"It was clear they didn't want us to either go back to our vehicles or go across the street to the church," Scott said. "They wanted to arrest us."
LMPD has not yet commented directly on Scott's arrest and the charges against her, her daughter and Parrish-Wright.
In a video press conference Friday afternoon, Louisville Metro Police interim Chief Robert Schroeder addressed the rioting charges that 17 protesters received.
"Under Kentucky's riot statute, anyone who is part of a group causing damage or riotous behavior is subject to the charge in rioting," Schroeder said. "It does not require an individual to actually have participated in a specific destructive act."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer, whom Scott has heavily criticized and called on to resign for months, also cautioned "peaceful protesters" that "if you're in a group where disruptive and violent behavior is happening, you need to separate from that group or you will be subject to arrest."
Scott recently drafted and prefiled a bill called Breonna's Law that would ban no-knock warrants in Kentucky, such as the one officers obtained to enter Taylor's home on March 13.
Released from jail at 8:13 a.m. Friday, Scott said she planned to go back to protesting that day and continue pushing for the passage of her bill.
"We will be back out here later on today," Scott said Friday morning. "You can't stop the revolution, you can't stop the movement for justice for Breonna Taylor."
Ted Shouse, an attorney representing the Scotts and Parrish-Wright, told The Courier Journal the felony rioting charge against his clients is "outrageous."
"All three of these women are clearly, factually innocent," said Shouse, noting that Scott's livestreamed video proves that. "The charges should be dismissed at the earliest opportunity. It's another sad day for Louisville. ... I hope the prosecutors do the right thing."
A spokesman for Jefferson County Attorney Mike O'Connell stated Friday evening that his office "has not received, nor has it had the opportunity to examine relevant evidence for these charges from last night. We will give deliberate and thoughtful review to the cases involving Representative Scott and others."
The arrest of Scott – the only Black woman in Kentucky's state legislature – on the felony count of rioting drew swift criticism Thursday night from her friends and allies, including elected officials.
Officials with the public library's union, AFSCME Local 3425, published a Facebook post early Friday morning defending Scott and questioning the accusations of police, saying she "has consistently been a vocal supporter of libraries and library workers and has been an ally specifically to our union through many battles."
Democratic U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth of Louisville tweeted harsh criticism of the arrest Friday evening and said Scott "has done more to lift our community up and bring us together in recent weeks than many in Frankfort seem to get done in entire terms of service."
"To accost, accuse, arrest, & charge her with setting fire to a library of all things – apparently minutes before the curfew was even in effect – is as stupid as it is untrue. Using guilt by association as grounds for arrest is yet another reason why the system needs profound change."
State Rep. Charles Booker, D-Louisville, tweeted: "My Shero, riding partner, and colleague in the State House, the sponsor of Breonna's Law, was one of the people arrested. Absolutely and deeply unbelievable."
Rep. Joni Jenkins, the Democratic leader of the state House from Shively, expressed her admiration for Scott, saying, "I know her to be someone incapable of any kind of violent act."
"What I do know is that she is doing everything in her power to help Louisville heal during these difficult times. She personifies the biblical verse that calls on us to 'be doers of the word and not hearers only.'"
Crystal Staley, a spokeswoman for Gov. Andy Beshear, issued a statement saying the governor does not know the circumstances of Scott's arrest and "hopes this will be resolved quickly," calling her "a strong advocate for her district and for justice."
Reach reporter Joe Sonka at jsonka@courierjournal.com and follow him on Twitter at @joesonka.
State Rep. Attica Scott speaks at Jefferson Square Park on Wednesday. Scott had just been released from jail after being arrested in overnight protests.
$$$
