BreonnaCon kicks off with forums as militias gather
Gardner, Hayes
23 Aug 2020
BreonnaCon, a four-day event in Louisville honoring Breonna Taylor, began Saturday with a free farmers market and two empowerment forums and will continue until Tuesday, culminating in a "massive demonstration throughout Louisville."
The event is organized by Until Freedom, a New York-based social justice organization. The group has organized a few recent events in Louisville, including a sit-in on Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's lawn last month, which resulted in 87 arrests.
The group's leaders have stationed themselves in Louisville for the past month, advocating for the arrest of the three police officers involved in Taylor's death and planning BreonnaCon.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was fatally shot by police officers during a failed narcotics investigation in March.
Co-founder Linda Sarsour said BreonnaCon is "engaging the community beyond just the protest."
"It's about time to bring more people in the fold to talk about Breonna and do something in honor of Breonna," Sarsour said through a face mask with Taylor's name on it. "One of the things that Tamika Palmer, which is the mother of Breonna Taylor, told us is that she wants her daughter to be associated, not just with the murder, but with something positive, something that uplifts women in the community."
After the farmers market, more than 100 women gathered at the restaurant Vibes near Waterfront Park or TaylorMade, a women's empowerment event, while men attended a similar forum. Until Freedom leaders spoke, as did members of Taylor's family. Her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, was also present.
It was an upbeat environment, and Until Freedom co-founder Tamika Mallory opened her remarks with, "What's up, family?"
"The movement is about also celebrating the lives of people murdered. You have to be able to remember that these people also had joy," Sarsour said of the cheerful mood.
As the event took place, more than 20 armed militia members gathered in a parking lot about 200 yards from Vibes. Some wore "thin blue line" logos, showing support for police. The members said they were not there as protesters, rather as "security," but declined to give more details. They attempted to block off the parking lot, which prompted the presence of dozens of Louisville Metro Police officers and, eventually, the blocking of streets.
LMPD believed more militia members may have showed up.
"We thought it best to go ahead and limit vehicle access to that area," LMPD Maj. Aubrey Gregory said.
BreonnaCon will continue Sunday with "Bre-B-Q," a barbecue and concert at Shawnee Park, and on Monday with a few events, including a press conference with family members of Taylor, George Floyd and Trayvon Martin, among others, at Simmons College.
Until Freedom says it will march to the Louisville Metro Police Department's training academy on Tuesday in what is expected to be a large demonstration.
"We're really looking at this as a march, mobilizing as many people as we can," Sarsour said. "There may be a disruption, there may be some sort of civil disobedience, but that's up to the Louisville Metro Police Department, it's not up to us."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer held a virtual press conference Saturday evening to discuss Tuesday's planned protest and to encourage people not to listen to unfounded rumors. He said that "if the protests turn unlawful, LMPD will be there to handle it."
"I understand why people are upset," Fischer said, "but the rumors are really out of control, so don't fall prey to those; live your life. We have a plan, just like we have over the past couple months, and we'll continue to do so."
And while Tuesday will be a culmination of BreonnaCon, it is not necessarily Until Freedom's final act in Louisville.
"We're here indefinitely," Sarsour said. "We're here until some cops get arrested, until somebody, some people are held accountable for the murder of Breonna Taylor, and so far that has not happened."
Attendants stand outside the BreonnaCon event at Vibes on River Road in Louisville on Saturday.
$$$
