Prescription for change
Wolfson, Andrew
30 Aug 2020
Like many local governments, the city of Louisville has rushed to reform its rules on police use of force after the deaths of Breonna Taylor and George Floyd at the hands of officers. The city banned no-knock warrants. It required police to intervene when they see fellow officers using excessive force. It now will have state police investigate shootings of civilians, so Louisville police aren't investigating themselves. But Campaign Zero, the police reform group launched in 2015 by leaders of Black Lives Matter, says Louisville has failed to adopt one of the most important safeguards to shield civilians from unnecessary police violence: Declaring that an officer pointing a weapon is a use of force — and requiring that it be reported. Black Lives Matter co-founder Samuel Sinyangwe said that rule is crucial. "You shouldn't draw a firearm unless you are going to use it, and if you do draw it, it more likely will be used," he said.
That was tragically illustrated in Kenosha, Wisconsin, on August 23, when at least three officers drew their weapons on Jacob Blake and one of them shot him seven times in the back, leaving him partially paralyzed.
Sinyangwe says a reporting requirement deters officers from drawing their guns and lets police officials and the public know which officer is doing it most frequently.
Campaign Zero says Louisville deserves credit for taking steps to reduce police violence but the city still doesn't follow best practices on police chases, shooting at moving vehicles or making disciplinary results and use of force reports publicly available.
It also says provisions of the Louisville Fraternal of Police Lodge 614 contracts — and the state Police Officers Bill of Rights — prevent police accountability.
They include rules that prohibit officers from being interviewed until at least 48 hours after a shooting or other incident and prevent past misconduct, including suspensions and reprimands, from being considered in discipline after a set number of years have passed.
Chuck Wexler, the Police Executive Research Forum's director, says LMPD deserves praise for being only one of three police departments in the country — with Baltimore and Fort Worth, Texas — to train all its officers in the PERF's specially designed program on communications and tactics.
Wexler said Louisville is also unique in that it is allowing researchers at University of Cincinnati to evaluate whether the training has worked to reduce officers' use of force. Its findings are expected soon.
But the changes so far have done little to appease protesters who have taken to the streets of Louisville for months demanding action in Taylor's case as well as more sweeping reforms they say are crucial to end the unequal justice meted out to Black people.
Reformers say police need to be trained to stop wrongful acts by fellow officers before they occur.
But The Courier Journal found that Louisville Metro Police spends more time training cadets on how to prepare for their graduation ceremony (eight hours) than in a role-playing session on detecting and de-escalating dangerous situations (5.5 hours).
The Courier Journal examined best practices for both policy and training, as proposed by 10 research and advocacy groups. They include Campaign Zero, PERF and the International Association of Chiefs of Police.
Here is how Louisville could both strengthen its policies to protect the public, and make sure police are trained to carry them out.
Tighten deadly force policy Recommendation: Allow deadly force only when there is an imminent threat to an officer's life or the life of another person and such force is strictly unavoidable to protect life. (Recommended by Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: Allows deadly force when there is an immediate threat of serious physical injury as well as death. LMPD says its policy is stricter because "immediate" is more restrictive than "imminent."
Examine officer's tactical decisions in using deadly force Recommendation: Require that an officer's tactical conduct and decisions leading to the use of deadly force be considered in judgments of whether such force was necessary. (Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: The department has no rule requiring that. But it says "officers should recognize that they may withdraw to a position that is tactically more secure or allows them greater distance in order to consider or deploy a greater variety of force options."
It also says "officers should perform their work in a manner that avoids unduly jeopardizing their own safety, or the safety of others, through poor tactical decisions."
LMPD says its policy matches the Campaign Zero recommendation.
Require reporting when officers point a gun at someone Recommendation: Prohibit officers from pointing a firearm at a person unless there is a reasonable perception of a substantial risk that the situation may escalate to justify deadly force. When an officer points a firearm at a person, it shall be reported as a use of force. (Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: LMPD has no rule on pointing a firearm.
Issue public reports on use of force Recommendation: To build understanding and trust, agencies should issue regular public reports on officers' use of force, including Ftings, deployment of less-lethal options and use of dogs. The reports should include demographic information about the officers and subjects involved and should be published at least once a year online and in print. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD policy: LMPD publishes monthly reports on the number of internal affairs investigations but not on use of force.
Ban chokeholds Recommendation: Ban all chokeholds and use of neck restraints or limit them to situations in which deadly force is authorized. (Use of Force Project and Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: Prohibits chokeholds except when lethal force is permitted. LMPD policy also advises that officers should not put their weight on a person's back or head, such as with their knees or arms, for a prolonged period of time. It also says due to the increased risk of injury, officers should avoid placing weight on a person's neck.
Tighten rule on shooting at fleeing suspects Recommendation: Forbid law enforcement officers from discharging their firearms to subdue someone who is fleeing unless they actively pose an immediate threat of death to the officers or another person. (Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: Allows officers to use deadly force against a fleeing suspect who poses an imminent danger of inflicting serious physical injury, as well as death — a less stringent standard.
Adopt the rule of proportionality Recommendation: Police use of force should be proportional to the threat faced. Some incidents that are minor in nature may be escalated by the mere presence of police. Under the concept of proportionality, officers would recognize that even though they might be legally justified in using force as the situation escalates, given the minor nature of the underlying event, a more appropriate and proportional response would be to step back and work toward de-escalation. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD policy: Doesn't mention proportionality. LMPD spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said the legal standard is "reasonable" force.
Restrict vehicle chases Recommendation: Vehicular pursuits of fleeing suspects can present a danger to the lives of the public, officers and suspects involved. Pursuit should only be allowed if the officer has a reasonable belief that the suspect, if permitted to flee, would be a danger to someone's life or cause serious injury. (International Association of Chiefs of Police)
LMPD policy: Before 2019, LMPD only allowed pursuits if an officer believed the violator being pursued has committed, or is wanted on a warrant for committing, a violent felony. But then-Chief Steve Conrad amended the rule to allow the pursuit of stolen vehicles, and on June 30, his successor, Robert Schroeder, extended the exception through the end of the year, saying it resulted in a reduction in violent crime because stolen cars were being used in crimes.
Provide personal protection shields Recommendation: Personal protection shields enhance officer safety and may support de-escalation efforts during critical incidents, including situations involving persons with knives, baseball bats or other improvised weapons that are not firearms. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD policy: Only mentions shields for its mounted patrol unit. The department said shields are impractical for general patrol use.
'Unbundle' police duties suited to social workers or others Recommendation: Sometimes referred to as "unbundling" duties assigned to police officers, cities offer a variety of examples for alternative methods of handling low-level 911 calls. New Orleans last year started using a private auto-assistance company for minor traffic crashes. Seattle diverts people reported for sex work and low-level drug possession to personal caseworkers. Eugene, Oregon, uses medics and crisis experts for mental health calls. (Campaign Zero)
LMPD policy: A qualified mental health professional acts as a liaison between mental health groups and the department's Crisis Intervention Team's coordinator, but social workers don't respond to calls.
Tighten foot pursuit policy Recommendation: Lone officers should not try to overtake fleeing suspects to make an arrest. Las Vegas police policy says the officer giving chase should not be the first person to put their hands on the suspect because foot pursuits often end in excessive use of force, including officer shootings. John Jay College Professor Phillip Atiba Goff found that after the policy, there was a 23% reduction in use of force and an 11% reduction in officer injury over several years. (International Association of Chiefs of Police)
LMPD policy: Officers pursuing on foot "must evaluate the risk involved and decide if continuing the pursuit is justified." They may terminate it if they believe that continuing the pursuit is unsafe. "Ultimately the job of the police entails arresting individuals who do not wish to be arrested, and each officer is required to weigh the risk to the public, themselves and the suspect," LMPD's Halladay said.
Strengthen rule on blocking vehicles Recommendation: Prohibit police officers from moving in front of moving vehicles. (Campaign Zero )
LMPD policy: Officers should "as a rule avoid tactics that could place them in a position where a vehicle could be used as a weapon against them."
Prohibit shooting at moving vehicles Recommendation: Shooting at vehicles must be prohibited. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD policy: Officers will not discharge their firearms either at or from a moving vehicle unless deadly force is being used against the officer or another person. "In the modern era, officers face the specter of vehicle ramming attacks. ... A complete prohibition would prevent officers from having the ability to protect the public we serve from vehicle ramming attacks," Halladay said.
Recognize officers who display restraint Recommendation: Police chiefs should reinforce policies and training by recognizing and rewarding officers who display professionalism and restraint. The Los Angeles Police Department created a "Preservation of Life" award for officers who defuse an incident without using deadly force, even when it might have been legally justified. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD practice: The department gives a Crisis Intervention Team officer of the year award to an officer who has demonstrated superior communication, compassion and de-escalation techniques in dealing with individuals experiencing a mental health crisis or an addiction.
It is common for LMPD to recognize and award officers who show good decision-making and judgment to stabilize potentially dangerous situations, Halladay said.
Increase de-escalation training Recommendation: De-escalation should be a core theme of an agency's training program. (Police Executive Research Forum)
LMPD practice: Cadets spend 5.5 hours on de-escalation in a role-play session and another hour on training about "suicide by cop." The department spends eight hours preparing new officers for their graduation ceremony.
All of the LMPD was trained last year in PERF's tactical model and LMPD has been recognized by the group for its efforts, Halladay said, adding that beyond the 5.5 hours, de-escalation is woven into many aspects of LMPD training.
Train police to intervene with peers Recommendation:EPIC (Ethical Policing Is Courageous) is part of a court-supervised effort to reform the New Orleans Police Department, teaching officers a new definition of loyalty. (EPIC with Georgetown Law School's Project ABLE, Active Bystandership for Law Enforcement)
LMPD policy: Since June, police are required to intervene to prevent other officers, regardless of rank or assignment, from using unlawful or excessive force. The department does not have a program to encourage peer intervention.
Officers are taught professionalism, which means they are responsible for their own actions, as well as the actions of fellow officers, Halladay said.
Transfer police shooting cases to outside investigators Recommendation: In four states, by law, the investigation or prosecution of police shootings are automatically transferred to another agency to avoid the conflict of a department investigating itself.
Outsourcing elsewhere has had mixed results. In New York, where since 2015 the state attorney general has investigated and prosecuted the deaths of unarmed civilians caused by police, the Justice Committee, a civil rights watchdog, says the order has brought "an unprecedented level of transparency." But in Connecticut, where cases are investigated by the state police and referred to a special prosecutor, the process has led to long delays.
LMPD policy: Mayor Greg Fischer announced July 24 the Louisville department from now on will ask Kentucky State Police to investigate police shootings where someone is killed or injured.
Kentucky allows its commonwealth's attorneys to request a special prosecutor if they have a conflict.
Increase training on 'implicit bias' Recommendation: Police should be trained to address their racial biases. (Campaign Zero)
LMPD practice: Cadets take a two-hour session on "21st Century Policing Practices" that includes four components, one of which is a class discussion of how implicit bias can affect community relationships. It spends another three hours on "biased law enforcement practices" that discusses racism and how law enforcement's role during the civil rights movement affected perceptions of police. The department presents another five hours on "police legitimacy" that includes a class discussion on how it has been hindered in some communities.
Overall, cadets spend twice as much time on firearms training (111 hours) as on community issues training (55 hours).
Last year, after back-to-back officers involved shootings the year earlier, the department required officers to complete a two-day course on critical thinking skills, de-escalation tactics and keeping suspects alive.
Recruits spend more than 100 hours dedicated to implicit bias, people in crisis, the history of racism, ethics and critical incident communication with the desired outcome being de-escalation, Halladay said.
Create a civilian review board or inspector general Recommendation: Civilian oversight gives police a place to voice concerns outside of the law enforcement agency, can help hold the police accountable for officer's actions and can help improve the quality of the department's internal investigations of alleged misconduct.
Nearly 125 cities and counties across the United States, from Portland, Maine, to Portland, Oregon, have some form of civilian review, according to the NACOLE, a Tuscon, Arizona-based nonprofit. (National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement)
Civilian review boards have a mixed track record of effectiveness and are often opposed by police unions. The Louisville Fraternal Order of Police in 2000 sued to block one that would have had subpoena power.
LMPD status: Mayor Fischer has said he supports creating a civilian review board with subpoena power, and a city group commissioned by the mayor has called for a board or commission of community members they hope will be charged with investigating police misconduct and complaints, along with reviewing internal investigations and the department's policies and training. Fischer said the General Assembly must approve giving a commission subpoena power.
Require officers to live in the city of Louisville Recommendation: Some activists want officers to be required to live in the cities they patrol — or receive incentives to live there — arguing it will make officers more culturally competent, diversify police forces and improve community relations. (President's Task Force on 21st Century Policing, 2015)
Chicago and Pittsburgh have residency requirements. But in about two-thirds of the U.S. cities with the largest police forces, most officers live outside of city limits. Researchers have found no evidence such requirements reduce crime, and police unions oppose them, saying they restrict freedom and make it harder to recruit.
LMPD policy: Officers are not required to live within the city limits, but those who do have a take-home car incentive, which is not available to those who live outside of the city.
Create a statewide database of bad officers Recommendation: Create a public database of officers who have been decertified, fired, found to be untruthful or repeatedly failed to follow training requirements.
Enacted in May by the state of Colorado.
Kentucky policy: The Kentucky Law Enforcement Council maintains records of officers who are certified and those who have been revoked and reports that information to a federal database. Records are available to the public under the state open records act, but no database is accessible to the public.
Randomly assign search warrant applications to judges Recommendation: Randomly assigning judges to review applications for search warrants would prevent police from "shopping" for judges they think are most likely to approve applications. Local judges could propose a rule to require it, subject to the approval of the chief justice. (Louisville defense attorney Ted Shouse)
LMPD spokeswoman: These are issues the courts must decide and police will have no problem abiding by whatever rules they determine are best.
Police arrive during a protest in downtown Louisville over the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police. An officer kicks a tear gas canister back toward protesters after it was thrown on May 28.
$$$
