Cards have 10-step plan to fight injustice
CAMERON TEAGUE ROBINSON
04 Sep 2020
"Our kids are living, thinking beings. They don't just run up the field, shoot a basket or run track or swim. They all have thoughts, concerns and have feelings. They live in this world just like us old people. We will support them."
Marvin Mitchell
Louisville associate athletic director for student services and diversity
A week after the Louisville football team met before a scheduled practice to discuss its plan to combat racial injustice, its action plan surfaced on Twitter.
Cornerback Kei'Trel Clark, a transfer from Liberty, tweeted out the 10-step plan the Cardinals have.
Those steps include:
1.) Black Lives Matter T-shirts.
2.) A flag to run out before and/or during games to represent their stance and fight for change.
3.) Marketing efforts for Black Lives Matter T-shirts for all athletes that is special to "our brand" to raise money for a charity.
4.) A video series per position group to be released via social media every Monday during the season to bring awareness to social injustice, police brutality, racism, equality and anything the players and coaches wanted to express in the weekly video.
5.) Organized team event during the bye week in the form of a unified staff against inequality.
6.) Come up with a hashtag that represents Louisville football, the city and their efforts to build a long lasting brand to create change.
7.) Possible banner change outside of the stadium to represent their efforts for change.
8.) Monday voluntary forums to discuss social injustice and life skills for success.
9.) Create leadership team for communication.
10.) Provide the time to cast their vote.
These plans come just a week after nearly every player and coach posted a picture on social media of the team linked in arms with a sign saying "We stand for Black lives and all those affected by social injustice." That sign also said "Black Lives Matter" on it.
This continues a trend of things Louisville has done this summer to fight systemic racism and social injustice. Louisville's coaches have been working with their players to get them registered to vote in the upcoming presidential election. And even before that, after protests in Louisville began after the death of Breonna Taylor, members of the football team and administrators, led by cornerback Anthony Johnson, took a march to the Big Four Bridge.
Marvin Mitchell, Louisville associate athletic director for student services and diversity, said he's been proud of the way U of L athletes have used their platform.
"We love it. We never want to infringe on their right of freedom of speech," Mitchell said. "Our kids are living, thinking beings. They don't just run up the field, shoot a basket or run track or swim. They all have thoughts, concerns and have feelings. They live in this world just like us old people. We will support them. Think about some of the quotes and videos they've done. It's some of the best work I've seen."
The football team's plan came out shortly after Louisville itself announced a new committee to focus on the same diversity and equity efforts. The committee called Strategically Organizing Against Racism has been given the acronym SOAR.
According to a release by the university, the committee will work to "provide educational opportunities and resources to enhance knowledge and empower action." It will create "brave and safe spaces to build and sustain a supportive anti-racist community and implement initiatives to assist and serve underrepresented and historically marginalized groups." The committee is made up of 14 members and is led by Kristia Worthy, U of L athletic director of talent development.
"I'm looking forward to the continued progress of the Athletic Department," Worthy said in the release. "By focusing on strategic initiatives, student-athlete and staff engagement, community partnerships, and hiring and retention practices, we will create lasting change that shows our commitment to diversity, equity, inclusion, and social justice. This will require us to continue having courageous conversations, to embrace vulnerability, hold each other accountable, and develop our leadership skills that will equip us to make a difference."
Mitchell, who is on the SOAR group as well as the ACC's committee for racial and social justice, said the committee began after conversations within the athletic department.
It started back in June and has held more than 15 events including an online forum that was held on Wednesday.
"In June we started with having open forums and letting people let their voices be heard," Mitchell said. "What we understand is that if you listen to folks then you have the opportunity to take what they say and then help on some of your decisions that educate you. We know that's very important. Our focus with this is to educate and we think that's the starting point for us."
The Louisville football team will begin its season on Sept. 12 against Western Kentucky at 8 p.m. on the ACC Network where it will have a chance to put its action plan on full display on prime-time television.
Cameron Teague Robinson CTeagueRob@gannett.com; Twitter: @cj_teague; Subscribe today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"Our kids are living, thinking beings. They don't just run up the field, shoot a basket or run track or swim. They all have thoughts, concerns and have feelings. They live in this world just like us old people. We will support them."
Marvin Mitchell
Louisville associate athletic director for student services and diversity
$$$
