'I can't be weak'
Brown, Quintez
12 July 2020
Say her name.
The significance of those three words goes beyond a simple protest chant. Saying her name means addressing and interrogating the complex life experiences of Black women due to the combination of patriarchy and racism.
Na'Kiya Perry, 18, aspires to open her own practice as an OB-GYN due to the racial inequities women of color face in our health care system.
A June 2019 graduate of duPont Manual High School, Perry is a Black woman who lives in the Shawnee neighborhood and attends Fisk University.
For her, the recent protests surrounding Breonna Taylor – a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman shot dead in her home by police serving a "no-knock" search warrant during a drug raid in early March – encouraged her to be more engaged in activism.
For Destiny Ealy, 19, the protests over the past six weeks changed the way she viewed the racial justice movement. As a Black woman who also lives in the Shawnee neighborhood, the protests prompted her to be more adamant about uplifting the stories of Black women and girls victimized by violence.
"We only hear about the Black males that get killed," she said, "not much about the females."
The Black Lives Matter movement and racial uprisings have created many conversations about racism and the criminal justice system, including how that system impacts residents in Louisville's predominantly Black and low-income West End, which has suffered from such historically racist policies such as redlining.
But due to the intersection of patriarchy and racism, conversations around Blackness, even in west Louisville, are commonly centered around the experiences of cishet Black men.
Black men, Ealy said, are also criminalized to the point where the news media only highlights their various interactions with the criminal justice system. So when we think of policing and criminal justice reform, we usually associate it with Black men.
Perry attributed the erasure of Black women to the ideology of the "strong black woman," also known as "Black superwomen syndrome."
She said the stigma is that Black women have a stronger capability to overcome adversity and are desensitized to the point that they just accept extra burdens.
"It's not OK," Perry said, "We still need to be heard.
"The same energy given to our men who are killed needs to be the same energy given to the women as well."
Perry reflected on her upbringing and watching her mom take on a "superwoman" role. She said her mom inherited the role at a young age because she had the responsibility of taking care of her siblings.
Perry said the idea is, "I can't be weak."
Ealy related to that concept, saying that while she was growing up she never thought her own mother revealed vulnerability.
Perry said the superwoman concept is adopted at an early age and is reflected in the expectation of achievement placed on Black women as well.
"We have to be exceptional all the time," said Ryane Jones, an 18-year-old Shawnee neighborhood resident and recent graduate of Sacred Heart Academy.
"It dictates the narrative that if you're not excellent in academics... then you don't matter," Jones said, adding that this ideology is detrimental to the self-esteem of Black women.
It also harms Black men, Perry said, because they do not get the same encouragement and motivation.
And when Black men are not invited to the same spaces that Black women are, it only adds to the burden that Black women carry, as now they must be the representative of the Black community.
"My existence in the West End contributes to how I participate in predominantly white spaces. When I carried myself, I had to remember that I was reflecting my own community, and that I had to push harder to prove that 'oh, something great can come out the West End.'"
And even when Black women excel, society will still delegitimize their presence.
"The way I carry myself, the grades I made, people thought I was from a different part of town," Ealy said.
When people asked Jones where she was from, she used to tell people "downtown," to avoid the negative connotations that are associated with the West End.
And it's the burden of proving themselves as worthy that makes them vulnerable to abuse not just from white men and women, but also Black men.
"I was often characterized as aggressive or too assertive," said Jones, speaking about how her white classmates viewed her.
"I also carry the fear of being assaulted in the streets by brothers that look like me," she said, referring to the sexual aggression women often experience, such as catcalling.
At a time when people are in the streets protesting the death of Breonna Taylor, Black women in west Louisville – like Ealy, Perry and Jones – continue to fight for their humanity to be recognized.
Perry said she struggled with loving and accepting herself while growing up. But now, she wants younger Black girls to know that it's OK to fall short. "You don't have to be the best of the best," she said.
She said know your strengths and weaknesses, and know where you can succeed. She said you might find yourself somewhere not doing too well.
"And that's OK."
Quintez Brown is a summer intern at The Courier Journal. He has been involved with the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests as an organizer and leader and is committed to racial justice and activism. He can be reached at 502-650-3190 or qbrown@courierjournal.com.
Tell me your story
This summer, my mission is to help tell the stories of people who live in my neighborhood – Louisville's West End. I will be on the streets of our communities – in California, Shawnee, Russell, Parkland, Park Hill, Park DuValle, Algonquin and Portland – talking with residents, amplifying their stories and sparking conversations about what our community needs to prosper. Those stories are waiting to be told, and I can't do that without you. So tell me your story.
Ryane Jones is a Shawnee neighborhood resident and recent graduate of Sacred Heart Academy.
Quintez Brown
Na'Kiya Perry, 18, left, a graduate of duPont Manual and Destiny Ealy, 19, a graduate of Central High School, stand outside the Shawnee Boys and Girls Club. Perry and Ealy both excelled in academics, but can recall being viewed differently by peers when they learned they were from the West End.
$$$
