Kentucky Opera to amplify community's voice
Toran, Andre
13 Sep 2020
The Kentucky Opera announced a new initiative Thursday that will produce high performance art for the masses.
The "Amplify Your Voice" campaign will use themes of faith, justice and family during the 2020-21 Brown-Forman Kentucky Opera season to give disenfranchised communities an opportunity to be heard via song.
"Singing elevates a message," said Barbara Lynne Jamison, general director and CEO of the Kentucky Opera. "What we are here to do right now is to elevate our community, and we are doing that in a variety of ways."
The Kentucky Opera is partnering with community organizations such as urban leagues across the state to crowdsource submissions of poems, testimonies, messages, adages and sayings that best express how they feel about the "civil justice movement" of today.
The opera will use those submissions to create original scores to highlight the overlooked and otherwise misunderstood in upcoming performances next spring.
"At a time when many people yearn to be heard and understood, we will explore the values we hold dear both individually and collectively," Jamison said.
Baritone and composer Jorell Williams, who will be heavily involved with the Kentucky Opera project, said there is no better time to roll out this initiative than 2020, considering the state of the country's social landscape. He sees the protests across the nation as a new era of the civil rights movement.
Williams said he foresaw what's unfolding in America's streets today — protests and riots, frustration and fear in the wake of unarmed Black citizens being killed at the hands of police and other parties — in Seattle roughly four years ago.
He and his colleagues had just performed "As One," an opera composed by Laura Kaminsky, that is a coming-of-age story about a transgender woman.
It was opening night, but it was also Election Day: November 8, 2016. Hillary Clinton, who Williams was pulling for, was up by 41 points when the performance started, he said. But by the time he and his colleagues walked off the stage that night, the narrative was different, and the high they felt about possibly electing the first female president evaporated.
"Everyone looked at their phones," Williams said. "And everyone's hearts were ripped out of their chests."
Donald Trump had won the election, and Williams said he was afraid seeds of hate would further divide the country. He remembered a community discussion from that night. "This is happening whether we want to believe it or not," he said. "What are we going to do to incite change?'"
Williams, who doubles as an activist in between shows and rehearsal, has reflected on how his greatest fears have materialized. He shudders when he thinks about what happened to people who look just like him. George Floyd. Ahmaud Arbery. Jacob Blake. Breonna Taylor.
But the question he posed that night in 2016 has not changed. And now, through his work with the Kentucky Opera, he has an opportunity to affect the change.
"What the company is doing in the long run with community engagement is creating and focusing on audience interaction and reaction based on everything that is currently happening socially," he said.
Being an active listener and an ally in bringing to light conversations people are uncomfortable having through art and storytelling is how the Kentucky Opera wants to help push the conversation forward, he added.
Before the pandemic and a summer filled with protests, the opera had already planned to perform something inspired by the 1960s civil rights era in its next season. The goal was to look at songs that were sung to uplift Black people. That plan was disrupted by the COVID-19 outbreak.
"This summer happened, and we really felt like 'How do we draw this (the songs and stories of the '60s) into today?'" Jamison said. "So, we started looking and we were like, 'Well, what are the songs today?"
That seed grew into "Testimonies of Justice." Williams will oversee many of the submissions for this work and will use it to create original songs.
Out of the themes that will drive the season, justice is probably the most salient, he said, though the others play a major role in closing the divide between different sections of the community.
It's all about moving people to feel something, to have the conversations through art they may be uncomfortable having at home or in their community.
"It's funny because I always take emotion for granted in the arts because that's where entertainment usually goes. But I would say it's important ... that emotions are felt as equally as intellect is through all this," Jamison said.
"If it was just emotion, you're either going to feel bad or good when you leave, but if we are doing this artfully, you are going to feel something, and you are going to understand. ... What I do hope is that we will feel compassion and choose to learn to see our neighbors through the lens of love."
To find out more, follow Kentucky Opera's re-imagined 2020-2021 Brown-Forman season, "Amplify Your Voice," online atKYOpera.org, on Facebook @KentuckyOpera and Instagram @KYOpera.
$$$
