Assigning blame in Breonna Taylor's death
09 Aug 2020
Suicides, homicides and accidents by firearms take more lives yearly than automobile crashes. Too many of these occur in the home. Whether it's through guilt, remorse or common sense, people must examine their beliefs and actions. They must ask themselves if they are, indeed, safer with a firearm in the house.
The tragic death of Breonna Taylor is a result of the faulty assertion by gun advocates that having a firearm in the house makes one safer.
I fully acknowledge the part that law enforcement and the judicial system played in Breonna's unfortunate death. There is no excuse for their failures. They must be held accountable and punished for their actions.
The United States has approximately 5% of the world's population and, according to a recent Small Arms Survey, 46% of the world's civilian firearms. The Brookings Institution writes in July that there are more guns than people in the United States (400 million are in circulation for a population of 330 million). That is more than enough weapons in this country for every man, woman and child to tuck under their pillows at night. Yet 80,000 to 100,000 more are sold every day. By this logic, we should all be safer.
But that is not the case. The Giffords Law Center writes that deaths by firearm are reaching almost 40,000 per year in the U.S. America accounts for nearly 51% of global yearly firearm deaths, and 1.3% of these deaths and 18% of all gun injuries were preventable, accidental or related to self-defense. Other numbers: 61% were suicides and 35% were homicides. Only 2.7% of all firearm deaths in this country were related to legal intervention or were of undetermined origin. We are less safe than they want us to believe.
Living in a home with a firearm significantly increases the risk of death or injury by gunshot. It becomes much easier for people to take their own lives and the lives of those around them. Breonna Taylor was unarmed. Her male companion was by all accounts legally armed. People would have us believe that being legal absolves a shooter of any error in judgment. The use of an illegal gun in the same hands would have produced a similar result.
Having a weapon in the house gives one an unfounded sense of security and invincibility. It allows an otherwise rational being to believe that he can take the attack to an intruder without fear of adverse consequences. It permits him to shoot even though he has yet to identify the perceived threat. It greatly endangers his life and the lives of other occupants and neighbors.
One wild shot elicited a fusillade of wild suppressive fire. Breonna Taylor died.
News sources report nationwide that lethal shootings in the home occur all too frequently. A man mistakenly shoots and kills his 14-year-old stepdaughter sneaking back into the house after curfew. A 3-year-old shoots and kills his 5-year-old brother while playing with a parent's gun. An 18-year-old shoots and kills his 11-year-old brother while struggling over a gun he stole. "The guilt that he must feel has got to be crazy," his father said.
Suicides, homicides and accidents by firearms take more lives yearly than automobile crashes. Too many of these occur in the home. Whether it's through guilt, remorse or common sense, people must examine their beliefs and actions. They must ask themselves if they are, indeed, safer with a firearm in the house.
I can imagine a different outcome for Breonna Taylor. I can envision a house without a gun. I can picture Breonna being "scared to death" by intruders. But that is seldom fatal in itself.
George M. Wasyluka is a Vietnam Air Force veteran qualified in using the M-16 rifle and a .38-caliber handgun.
Your Turn
George M. Wasyluka
Guest columnist
Suicides, homicides and accidents by firearms take more lives yearly than automobile crashes. Too many of these occur in the home. Whether it's through guilt, remorse or common sense, people must examine their beliefs and actions. They must ask themselves if they are, indeed, safer with a firearm in the house.
William Nickles, right, hands flowers to Heather Green to decorate Jefferson Square Park downtown to mark the 50th day of protests following the death of Breonna Taylor.
$$$
