Metro Council member wants to cut Louisville's police budget
Loosemore, Bailey
19 June 2020
If city leaders truly want to rethink policing, one Louisville Metro Council member says they need to start by revising the upcoming budget.
The council is discussing how it will spend more than $600 million in revenue over the 2020-21 fiscal year. And as protests continue against racism in the criminal justice system, Councilman Brandon Coan said he wants the council to divert some money that's earmarked for police to other departments that support public safety.
In a Wednesday night newsletter, Coan, a Democrat, laid out a tentative plan that suggests the council take about $9 million from the police department's budget and disperse it among other city agencies, including the Center for Health Equity and the Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods.
"I think the city of Louisville would be sticking its head in the sand ... to not begin considering what a transition looks like," said Coan, whose district includes the Highlands. "Clearly, there's going to have to be some evolution and change in what policing in America looks like, starting now."
For more than 20 days, protesters have taken to Louisville streets to demand justice for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who died in March at the hands of police.
As part of the protests, some community members have called on city officials to defund the police, which they say entails diverting some money from police budgets toward housing, workforce development and other services that help reduce crime rates by pulling people out of poverty.
Several Metro Council members told The Courier Journal that while they agree the city should support those services, they don't think it should come at the expense of police.
But Coan said such a move would help officers by transferring some of their responsibilities to other departments that are better equipped to deal with issues of homelessness, mental illness and addiction, among other needs.
"Transfer of some workload, responsibilities and funds from police officers to public health and social workers makes perfect sense," Coan wrote in his newsletter. "Moreover, we admit the current strategy is not working."
Specifically, Coan said he'd like the city to reduce the police department's budget by 15% — or about $27 million — over the next three years, in coordination with the remainder of Mayor Greg Fischer's term.
In April, the mayor released his proposed 2020-21 budget, which included allocating nearly $180 million in revenue to the police department — which represents about 27% of the city's total appropriations.
Fischer has since said he supports reimagining the police department. And he's pointed to several attempts by his administration to expand public safety outside law enforcement, including creating the Office of Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods and increasing funding for the Center for Health Equity.
Coan said he'd like to see more money directed to those initiatives through the $9 million that he proposes cutting from the police budget this budget cycle.
According to his plan:
$5 million could pay for 50 new community health and social workers, who could help respond to calls for service.
$1.1 million could go to the Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods, which works to prevent violence through intervention.
$1 million could go toward reinstating and doubling the Small Business Development team.
$1 million could go toward investments in Black communities that are decided through a participatory budgeting process.
$500,000 could support development of the Louisville Community Grocery.
$223,000 could fully fund seasonal pool operations.
"What I'm suggesting isn't punitive in any way," Coan said. "It's just realizing the facts of where we are and what, I think, is the beginning of some changes to rebalance our public safety system.
"A sliver of the police budget can make a massive difference in other areas of our public safety system."
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore.
$$$
