Kroger to reopen store after looting
Kobin, Billy; Loosemore, Bailey
After suffering damage and looting the previous morning, one of the West End's only grocery stores is expected to reopen Wednesday — a relief for community members and political leaders who'd expressed heartbreak and anger about the destruction.
Video captured the looting and gunfire early Tuesday at the Kroger near Dino's Food Mart at 26th and West Broadway, where peaceful protests had otherwise taken place throughout Monday over the death of David McAtee.
People were seen in a widely shared video entering a side door of the Kroger, 2710 W. Broadway, and running back out with shopping carts full of items.
Video also showed a group pulling money from a nearby Chase Bank ATM while repeated rounds of gunfire are heard going off in the background.
A security guard at the Kroger said the inside pharmacy, beer aisle and baby supply aisle had been raided, with much of the food left untouched.
In a press briefing, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said criminal acts such as what happened at the store "submerge the whole purpose of peaceful protests" in the names of McAtee and Breonna Taylor, a black woman who was fatally shot by police in her apartment in March.
"There are criminals exploiting this occasion of sincere protest to create destruction and to steal from a business that so many community members rely on for their most basic needs," he said. "So come on, folks. We're better than this."
Fischer said he spoke Tuesday with Kroger representatives, who said damage at the store could be repaired.
"You can fix a walk-in cooler, you can fix a piece of glass," he said. "... But the most poignant thing to me that they shared was when they pulled up this morning, there were members of the community sweeping up glass on the sidewalk. That's what we are as a community."
Kroger spokeswoman Erin Grant said the Cincinnati-based grocer decided to close the Broadway store earlier Monday out of "an abundance of caution."
It will reopen Wednesday with "limited hours of operation," Grant added.
"We are saddened by the events of last night, but are thankful that none of our associates or customers were injured during the incident," Grant said in a statement.
"We all have a responsibility to speak out against racism and injustice when and where we see it," she said. "But what's more, we have a responsibility to more fully examine ourselves and to engage one another with greater compassion and deeper listening."
Jackie Floyd, a community leader who lives in Russell, which is served by the Kroger, called the store a "mainstay in the community," not just for food but for socializing among friends.
It's one of three full-service grocery stores in western Louisville's nine neighborhoods, which are predominantly designated food deserts, where residents do not have adequate access to healthy, affordable food.
Floyd said Tuesday she was concerned that the actions of a few could reduce that number to two.
"My neighbors that don't have a car, that are income challenged, they depend on this Kroger," she said. "... Now that it's gone, now that it's closed, what now?"
Pastor Jeff Johnson of Revelation Tabernacle in New Albany said he grew up in the West End and knows that the Kroger "is a hub of food and sustenance for tens of thousands of people in this area."
"People get their prescriptions here," Johnson said. "... There's a lot of elderly people, they can't go out to the South End or to the East End to get their food."
Floyd said she and other community leaders scrambled Tuesday morning to figure out how people in the Russell and California neighborhoods can get food and medicine while it was closed.
Lenise Bell said she showed up to the store to see how she could assist. She has a car and posted on social media that she was willing to drive anyone who had to transfer their prescription elsewhere.
"A whole lot of people have reached out saying they're willing to help out as well," she said. "... I'm blessed enough to have transportation to be able to assist with that, and I'll do whatever I can."
But while many have offered to help, Floyd and others said they were still fighting back anger over why the store wasn't protected.
A security guard told WLKY that it took police officers about 45 minutes to respond to the store.
"They should have known that it was coming," Floyd said of the police. "... I talked to another neighbor yesterday, and we were concerned about Kroger. How come others were not concerned about Kroger and didn't try to protect Kroger?"
On Monday, Fischer said the National Guard had been asked to stay out of the West End to tamp down hostilities that arose following McAtee's death — though several troops arrived at Dino's Food Mart just before 11 p.m. in response to a fire on the roof.
Fischer later said their arrival at the fire was a mistake.
Roughly 24 hours before the looting was seen taking place, police fatally shot McAtee while responding to a "large" group that had gathered outside Dino's.
Now-former LMPD Chief Steve Conrad said someone in that crowd fired at the law enforcement personnel, who returned fire and shot McAtee, the owner of a popular West End barbecue business.
LMPD released video footage Tuesday that the department said shows McAtee shooting a gun before officers and National Guard troops return fire.
But McAtee's mother, who mourned Monday at the scene of the fatal shooting where her 53-year-old son's body remained for hours, said he was a "community pillar" who "didn't hurt nobody."
Gov. Andy Beshear has ordered Kentucky State Police to investigate the shooting.
Retired teacher Ruth Sister protests in the parking lot of Kroger at 2710 W. Broadway on Tuesday after it was vandalized and looted. The store will reopen today with "limited hours of operation."
$$$
