Kentucky's court system got things right on Friday
20 July 2020
"I was hoping for a more congenial Joe," David King wrote after he read my column Thursday afternoon about Attorney General Daniel Cameron's wrong-headed attempt to strike down Gov. Andy Beshear's directives to fight the coronavirus.
It bothers some people when columnists aren't "positive," whatever that means.
Well, here goes.
Friday was a terrific day for Kentucky — particularly for its court system.
First, the Kentucky Supreme Court stepped into the fray and blocked two lower courts rulings that struck down Beshear's coronavirus orders meant to protect us all from the virus.
This was important for numerous reasons, not the least of which is that people will die if Beshear's orders are invalidated and businesses are allowed to go back like it was before the virus struck, with no rules or requirements regarding masks or social distancing.
In its unanimous order, the court acknowledged the governor is given broad authority to deal with situations like the virus and that its order was necessary to ensure Kentucky has a "clear and consistent statewide public heath policy."
In doing so, the court took the cases from uber-conservative judges — handpicked by Cameron and Agriculture Commissioner Ryan Quarles — who had filed a more limited suit against Beshear's orders.
The court will hear the cases and decide later whether Beshear acted within the law when he declared a state of emergency and issued a range of orders and regulations to deal with it.
If the court rules against Beshear, he may have to call the legislature back into a costly and time-consuming special session to ask for emergency legislation to fight the virus, including giving schools the ability to use nontraditional instruction methods — such as distance learning — to protect students, teachers and families.
In its order, the Supreme Court told the circuit courts to go ahead and decide any cases they want on the issue, "but no order, however characterized, shall be effective." By the end of Friday, Boone Circuit Judge Rick Brueggemann, hadn't even bothered to file an order striking down Beshear's mandates as he said he was going to do the night before.
He must have figured it was like writing a term paper for which he knew he wouldn't get a grade.
Jefferson County Attorney Mike O'Connell also gets credit for dropping the bogus felony charges the Louisville Metro Police filed against 87 protesters who sat in Cameron's front yard and chanted slogans earlier in the week. They were urging Cameron to charge police officers involved in the March 13 shooting of Breonna Taylor in her apartment.
It's no wonder African Americans don't trust the LMPD when they can't even peacefully protest without the department filing such ridiculous trumped-up charges against them.
Police charged the protesters with criminal trespassing, disorderly conduct — both misdemeanors — and intimidating a participant in the legal process, which is a Class D felony and is punishable by one to five years in prison.
The law was intended to keep people from threatening or harming witnesses, lawyers and judges in court cases. It was not intended to be used as a bludgeon against people peacefully protesting an elected official.
Police said they charged the protesters with the crime because they believed they were threatening Cameron's home with arson.
The protesters were chanting about wanting justice for Taylor. When a leader of the protest chanted, "If we don't get it," the protesters would respond, "Burn it down."
But they weren't talking about the house. They were chanting that when most in the crowd didn't know that Cameron's home was their destination that day, and they used the phrase interchangeably with, "Shut it down."
Clearly, they were talking about burning down or shutting down a system they see as unjust. Police, who have spent dozens of hours monitoring the protesters over the last seven weeks should have known this.
Watching the video of the protest, it seems even the disorderly conduct charge was a stretch. As police moved through the crowd making arrests, the protesters stood, put their hands behind their backs to be hand-cuffed, and peacefully walked away.
O'Connell fell short only when he, in an attempt to save face for LMPD, said the felony charges were justified but that he made his decision to drop the charge "in the interest of justice and the promotion of the free exchange of ideas."
The charges weren't justified.
And they followed a pattern of police, not just in Louisville, of loading up criminal charges in an attempt to force the accused to plead guilty in exchange for dropping some charges. You also have to wonder if this was an attempt to shut up those who are demanding charges against members of the LMPD.
Whatever, the felony charges were dropped. Score one for justice.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Protesters raise their fists outside the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron Tuesday afternoon in the city of Graymoor-Devondale. Around 200 people, organized by the group Until Freedom, marched from Ballard High School up Herr Lane to Cameron's neighborhood, chanting Taylor's name as well as calling for justice for her killing by LMPD.
$$$
