Settlement shows police must change
20 Sep 2020
The historic settlement in the Breonna Taylor civil suit may not have come with the city of Louisville's admission of wrongdoing, but the message it sends is indisputable:
Taylor should not have died at the hands of police.
And the city's Metro Police Department must change – both its philosophical approach to policing and the leadership traits needed in its next chief – to prevent other people like her from dying in a similar circumstance.
The record-breaking $12 million the city agreed to pay Taylor's family is the largest settlement ever on behalf of Louisville police and one of the largest payouts in the nation for the shooting of a Black person by police.
It sends a strong statement to the Taylor family, the Louisville community and the nation: Breonna's life mattered.
And it's not just the money that speaks loudly in this wrongful death case. It's also the speed at which the city reached a settlement and the police reforms that could start the process of real change in Louisville's troubled police department – and in our broken community.
Wrongful death cases typically take years to litigate, but the city reached an agreement less than five months after the family filed the April 27 civil lawsuit alleging that Louisville police used excessive force and were grossly negligent in Taylor's death.
Mayor Greg Fischer and County Attorney Mike O'Connell are to be commended for settling the case quickly. With racial strife threatening to rip apart our community, they seemed to understand "the fierce urgency of now."
They also realize, as O'Connell said during Tuesday's press conference announcing the settlement, "Today alone is not enough. My hope is that this agreement is the next step in building a more just Louisville."
Constructing that "more just Louisville" is the catalyst that drove the significant police reforms in the settlement.
Several of the reforms focus on search warrants, including requiring police commanders to sign off on all search warrants before they go to a judge and mandating written approval of a SWAT risk assessment matrix before they're executed.
These changes are key because Taylor, 26, was killed in the hallway of her South Louisville apartment by police who were executing a no-knock search warrant as part of a botched narcotics investigation. Police say they identified themselves before they knocked in her door after midnight on March 13, but Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired a shot, saying he didn't hear them.
Police responded with a barrage of gunfire, hitting Taylor five times.
In response to Taylor's death, the Louisville Metro Council on June 12 approved Breonna's Law, which bans no-knock search warrants.
The settlement also includes reforms designed to get officers more involved in low-income communities where they work, which is essential to helping them better understand the people they often police. For example, officers would get housing credits to live within low-income census tracts in Louisville and be paid to perform at least two hours of community service in the communities they serve.
Also important is that social workers would assist the police department on dispatched runs. LMPD should look to crisis intervention teams in other metropolitan areas. These programs help police and social workers establish partnerships and include intensive training for officers around best practices to de-escalate and connect individuals to resources.
These police reforms are a positive first step.
However, more substantial change is needed to root out systemic racism, including revising the police contract to bring about more accountability, increasing holistic implicit bias training, hiring more diverse officers, creating a civilian review board with subpoena power and hiring top leadership that will bring a more community-focused culture to the department.
With these changes, Louisville would indeed be headed in the right direction.
But it is wrong that it took Taylor's tragic death and three months of daily protests against racial injustice to get here.
It is wrong that Louisville has endured years of tragedies and injustice at the hands of police, including Michael Newby, who was shot in the back and killed by police in 2004 while fleeing during an attempted undercover drug buy; the "Misidentified Four" – Shaquazz Allen, Tyrone Booker, Craig Dean and Jerron Bush – who were charged with first-degree robbery in 2014 based on a process that the police department's own policies warned was "inherently suggestive"; the seven victims in the Explorers sexual assault case, the first lawsuit for which was filed in 2017. Tae-Ahn Lea, who was 18 when he was pulled over last year for making a wide turn, yanked from his car, frisked and handcuffed while a drug-sniffing dog searched his car.
The officer who pulled over Lea asked him, "Why do you have this negative view towards police?"
It's the kind of question that never should have to be asked again once Louisville selects its next police chief – the fourth leader of LMPD since Taylor's March 13 death.
Until Louisville officers understand why people of color have a negative view toward them, real reform is not possible.
Much change is needed.
The settlement with Taylor's family is a first step in achieving justice – for Breonna and for our entire community.
Attorney Ben Crump holds the hand of Tamika Palmer, mother of Breonna Taylor, after the $12 million settlement.
$$$
