Until white silence ends, we won't have racial justice
Peacock, Jardana
03 June 2020
As long as those in power can count on white silence, business as usual will continue — the killing of black people will continue. White silence must end.
In the weeks since the Louisville community learned of the killing of Breonna Taylor in her apartment by Louisville police in late March, protests have swept the city. The collective power expressed by communities has forced city leaders to respond; however, these actions — which include charges being dropped against Breonna's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, and the suspension of no-knock warrants — are not enough. Now we mourn another black life lost to police violence on Monday: David McAtee.
Too many black and brown people are dying. In the 80 days since Breonna's killing, the city has not fired the officers involved, nor pressed charges against them. The city has not moved to address why more funding goes to policing than to resource Louisville's black community. Breonna was an essential worker, an emergency medical technician and only 26 years old. She had a family that loved her and a community she cared about.
The war zone that has been created by the LMPD and the mayor of Louisville is unacceptable and an outrageous response to the grief, the rage and the loss people are feeling. People are traumatized by the continued deaths of their daughters, sons, fathers, cousins and friends for taking a run, watching TV in their homes and stating they "cannot breathe." In response to this continued inhumanity and violence upon black people, the mayor of Louisville and the police department have brought in state troopers. Instead of addressing the root issues of racism, the city has served us beatings with batons, shot civilians with rubber bullets and used pepper spray widely.
However, we white people are also complicit. We must also end our white silence. Louisville Showing Up for Racial Justice calls upon white people in our city to end the white silence that provides cover to those in power and continues the brutalization of black and brown people. Ensure that Louisville is more than just a spectacle of compassion. The city must adopt a racial justice lens by which to evaluate every budget decision, every policy, every dollar spent in this community
Let's work together to end the racism in our city, within our hearts and in our minds. We support our black community whose lives are at stake with every breath they take. This killing must end, white people let's use our words, bodies and action for justice. Say their names, never stop saying their names. These are people. These people have families and communities.
Say their names. End white silence now: Breonna Taylor, David McAtee, Oscar Grant, Adrian Reynolds, Michael Newby, Tony McDade, Ahmaud Arbery, George Floyd, Eric Garner, Trayvon Martin, Mike Brown, John Crawford III, Ezell Ford, Tanisha Anderson, Akai Gurley, Tamir Rice, Freddie Gray, Yassin Mohamed, Shantel Davis, Rekia Boyd, Kendra James, Aiyana Stanley-Jones, Kathryn Johnston, Tyisha Miller, Tarika Wilson, Miles Hall, Atatiana Jefferson, Amber Carr, Korryn Gaines, Yvette Smith, Miriam Carey, Shelly Frey, Darnisha Harris, Malissa Williams, Nina Pop, and so many more — too many more lives that have been lost because of white silence.
Jardana Peacock is a Louisville antiracist activist and parent.
Your Turn
$$$
