No-knocks left out of GOP's bill
Tobin, Ben; Aulbach, Lucas
18 June 2020
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell introduced his chamber's version of a federal police reform bill Wednesday morning, setting up a clash with House Democrats.
The bill, spearheaded by U.S. Sen. Tim Scott, a South Carolina Republican, includes restrictions on funds to local and state law enforcement departments that do not have bans on chokeholds. The bill also would strengthen funds for body cameras, make lynching a federal hate crime and increase penalties for false police reports.
It does not, however, include a ban on no-knock warrants, which have been prohibited in Louisville following the police shooting of Breonna Taylor by officers who were executing one. Scott, as he introduced the bill Wednesday morning alongside a coalition of Senate Republicans, said there's not enough data on no-knock warrants to support a ban.
"When we hear about the Breonna Taylor case in Louisville, Kentucky, we don't have any information around no-knock warrants," Scott said. "So for us to start a conversation with banning no-knocks doesn't sound like a solid position based on any data because we don't have that data. Once we have the information we can then turn to the training that is necessary to deescalate situations."
McConnell, whose hometown is Louisville, said the group is "serious about making a law here." The Senate, he said, will work to confirm two circuit judges this week or early next week and will then take up the police reform bill.
The bill comes as protests have taken place across the nation over the deaths of Taylor and George Floyd, both Black Americans killed by police officers. In Louisville, protesters hit the streets for the 21st day in a row on Wednesday to demand justice for Taylor.
Last week, House Democrats unveiled their version of a police reform bill, which includes a ban of no-knock warrants in drug cases at the federal level. Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician, was unarmed when Louisville Metro police fatally shot her just before 1 a.m. March 13 while serving a search warrant at her South End apartment as a part of a narcotics investigation. Her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, had fired one shot, injuring an officer, and said later that he thought it was an intruder.
The Louisville Metro Council voted to ban no-knock warrants June 11 after Mayor Greg Fischer suspended their use two weeks earlier. Fischer signed the legislation the following day.
Rand Paul, Kentucky's junior senator, has supported and introduced legislation that would ban no-knock warrants nationally. He was not among the Republican senators who spoke Wednesday.
The House has not voted on its bill, which would also ban chokeholds at the federal level and limit police officers' qualified immunity, a legal rule that has shielded police officers from civil lawsuits. But if the House passes the legislation, McConnell said Tuesday, it is "going nowhere in the Senate."
He said Wednesday that he plans to bring up the Senate bill in the coming days.
"I'm going to fill cloture on the motion to proceed, and our Democratic friends — if they want to make a law, and not just try to make a point — I hope they'll join us in getting on the bill and trying to move forward in the way the Senate does move forward when it's trying to get an outcome, rather than just sparring back and forth, which you all have seen on frequent occasions by both sides," McConnell said.
Paul is looking at considering both bills, a spokeswoman from his office said Wednesday, and he has several amendments that he plans to offer, including one based on the "Justice for Breonna Taylor Act" — legislation he filed last week that would prohibit no-knock warrants.
U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth, of Louisville, on Tuesday said there are several points he believed would be in the Senate bill that are "perfectly reasonable" but that the GOP senators didn't go far enough.
The introduction of the bill comes one day after President Donald Trump signed an executive order on police reform. The order includes:
A ban on chokeholds, unless an officer's life is at risk.
Putting federal money toward providing use-of-force and deescalation training for police.
A push toward developing safer weapons for police to prevent deadly interactions.
A database to track officers credibly accused of abuse, so they aren't rehired by other police departments.
Directing more federal funds toward officers who deal closely with homelessness and individuals with mental and substance abuse issues, and providing more resources for co-responders such as social workers to work with officers.
Contact Ben Tobin at bjtobin@gannett.com and 502-377-5675 or on Twitter @TobinBen. Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach.
Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C., center, speaks at a news conference to announce a Republican police reform bill on Capitol Hill on Wednesday. The bill does not include a ban on no-knock warrants.
$$$
