Police website directs visitors to resources for Taylor protesters
Krauth, Olivia
03 June 2020
The tide has turned in the battle over Breonna Taylor protest-related website domains.
After BreonnaTaylor.com briefly led to a donation page for the Louisville Metro Police Foundation before it was pulled from the internet, LouisvillePoliceDepartment.com now leads visitors to a list of resources for protesters.
At the website, shared on social media Tuesday morning, visitors can find links to sites for Taylor and David McAtee, both of whom were shot and killed by law enforcement in Louisville.
Links to The Bail Project, the Action Network and Black Lives Matter are also included.
The website arrives after the internet address featuring Taylor's name encouraged visitors to "support good police" by donating to the Louisville Metro Police Foundation, a private group that promotes the police and public safety measures.
The Taylor website was pulled down hours after The Courier Journal reported on it amid backlash on social media and condemnation from the police foundation.
"We would NEVER do something so inappropriate and are doing our best to track down who put our link on this page," Tracie Texas Shifflett, the director of the foundation, said Monday.
"We are saddened and disheartened that someone would do this, especially during this time when we need unity and not division."
The site using Taylor's name had been up since May 16, attorney Lonita Baker, who is representing Taylor's family, told The Courier Journal on Monday.
"It is a slap in the face whether they were part of putting this site together or not they have not tried to take it down," Baker said.
Louisville has seen an uprising of protests over the past week, as hundreds demand justice for Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed black woman who was shot and killed in a police raid in March.
Protesters and community leaders want a permanent end to no-knock warrants, like the one used in the raid that left Taylor dead, and for the officers who shot at her to be fired and prosecuted. No-knock warrants have been suspended.
The unrest in Louisville has captured national attention, joining protests against police brutality in several major cities following the death of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis.
Law enforcement shot and killed McAtee, the owner of YaYa's BBQ in western Louisville, early Monday morning after officials said someone shot at officers.
Mayor Greg Fischer fired former LMPD Chief Steve Conrad after learning no police had their body cameras on during the shooting.
McAtee's incident is under state, federal and local police investigation.
$$$
