Attica Scott: LMPD is investigating protest tear gas complaint
Kobin, Billy
08 July 2020
State Rep. Attica Scott said Monday that the Louisville Metro Police Department is investigating her complaint of getting pushed by an LMPD officer and hit with tear gas during one of the first nights of downtown protests in late May.
Scott, a Louisville Democrat who is also the only Black woman in Kentucky's legislature, posted a photo on Instagram of a letter she received from a commander with LMPD's Professional Standards Unit.
The commander tells Scott in the letter, which is dated June 29, that her complaint has been assigned to an LMPD sergeant to investigate.
The contact information for the LMPD investigator is included in the letter, which also asks Scott to "contact this investigator should you discover additional witnesses, information or evidence which may be pertinent to the investigation of your complaint."
Scott captioned her Instagram photo of the June 29 letter with lyrics from Public Enemy's "Black Steel in the Hour of Chaos."
"I got a letter from the government The other day," Scott wrote. "I opened and read it It said they were ..."
Scott said she submitted her complaint June 18 over LMPD's actions toward her and other demonstrators at a May 29 protest in downtown Louisville.
That Friday night marked the second night of mass protests in the city over the deaths of Breonna Taylor and other Black Americans at the hands of police.
Her fellow state representative, Charles Booker, aired similar grievances via Twitter while attending the May 30 protest, one day after Scott says she was pushed and hit with tear gas.
Booker, who at the time was running for U.S. Senate in a Democratic primary that he since lost to Amy McGrath, tweeted a video at 8:52 p.m. that day showing a cloud of gas drifting down the street and armed officers holding shields and batons.
"We were yards away. No one was confrontational. It was not 9p. They started throwing gas at us anyway," the tweet said. "I wish I could say this was unbelievable."
Scott has previously shared publicly her claims of LMPD personnel pushing and hitting her with tear gas as she participated in the May 29 demonstration.
The state lawmaker shared a photo of her complaint in a previous tweet, which described how she was "peacefully protesting" about 9:20 that night in the area of Sixth and Liberty streets.
Scott said she was using her cellphone to record video of officers approaching protesters when "an officer named J. Johnson advanced on her."
"Officer Johnson used his body to push and shove Ms. Scott," the complaint says. "Shortly thereafter, without any warning or order to disperse, members of the Louisville Metro Police Department advanced on her and the crowd deploying tear gas."
Scott also tweeted that her video of the officer "pushing and shoving me is on Instagram Live."
After filing the complaint, she tweeted that she hoped "others do the same."
"If there is ever an investigation into LMPD, we want a paper trail. #NoJusticeNoPeace," Scott added.
An LMPD spokesperson did not immediately return an email seeking comment and confirmation of Scott's complaint.
Protesters and some officials previously have criticized LMPD's use of tear gas and pepper balls, along with other dispersal techniques, during largely peaceful downtown protests that with instances of violence and property damage.
Taylor was a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman whom LMPD officers fatally shot during a drug-related search warrant at her apartment in March.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, who was also in the apartment, fired one shot in response to the officers entering the apartment, hitting Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh. Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove returned fire, striking Taylor at multiple times.
Walker has said he thought intruders were breaking in and that he and Taylor never heard police announce themselves before breaking in the door.
Neighbors have corroborated Walker's account, according to his attorney and lawyers for Taylor's family.
LMPD officials have claimed that the officers did knock and announce themselves before using a battering ram to force their way inside the apartment.
No drugs were found as part of the raid, which has resulted in various investigations, ongoing protests and calls for the involved officers to lose their jobs and face criminal charges.
So far, Hankison is the only LMPD member to be fired for his actions during the raid, though he is appealing the decision.
The first night of protests over the death of Taylor came on May 28, hours after the public release of Walker's emotional 911 call that he made after Taylor was shot.
Thousands flooded the streets throughout downtown Louisville on that first Thursday night of protests, which were marred later on when seven people were shot outside Metro Hall by an assailant or assailants whom police have yet to be apprehend.
LMPD leaders said the use of tear gas during various nights of protests, including the May 29 demonstration that Scott's complaint focuses on, was necessary because demonstrators had brought bricks, fireworks, leaf blowers, Molotov cocktails, and jars filled with gasoline, urine and vomit.
Police officers in riot gear also used the physical force to disperse crowds that had gathered in downtown streets as part of gatherings deemed "unlawful."
But critics said that LMPD, along with Kentucky State Police and National Guard personnel called in to Louisville, started attempting to clear out peaceful protesters before a since-rescinded 9 p.m. citywide curfew had taken effect.
In response to the backlash, interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder announced in June that officers won't be allowed to shoot tear gas without his or his designee's direct approval.
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
State Rep. Attica Scott speaks during a rally on the steps of the Kentucky state Capitol on June 25.
$$$
