Many state ex-felons vote in their first election
Kenning, Chris
24 June 2020
For all of his adult life, Hakeem Smith was barred from voting by Kentucky's felony disenfranchisement laws.
He was far from alone. Kentucky's lifetime ban for felony offenses long blocked a staggering one in four Black residents from participating in elections.
But this week, the 29-year-old father and factory worker proudly wore a three-day-old "I Voted" wristband, a sign of a first chance to vote that he didn't miss.
Tuesday marked the first election since Gov. Andy Beshear automatically restored voting rights to Smith and more than half of an estimated 312,000 Kentucky residents with felonies who had completed their sentences.
He cast his first ballot just as protests and a national reckoning over racial justice helped make change seem more possible than it has in a long time, he said.
"I believe my vote counts and has the power to bring about change," said Smith, whose theft-related felony left him unable to vote. "I'm from the West End of Louisville" where he sees voting and protests working together to "push against systems of oppression."
State elections officials said it was uncertain still how many of the more than 175,000 ex-offenders who had regained voting eligibility had registered to vote or participated Tuesday or earlier with mail-in or early voting.
Amid fears that Louisville's single election-day polling place amid the pandemic might dampen turnout, some newly restored voters said they were propelled by protests for reform following the Louisville shooting of Breonna Taylor. Others cited the late-surging Senate candidacy of Charles Booker, a state lawmaker who joined marches and represents predominantly Black west Louisville.
Joshua Douglas, a University of Kentucky law professor who studies voting rights, said that "the national political conversation — and what happened in Louisville" may boost turnout but also noted that the pandemic scuttled planned efforts to make sure newly restored voters were registered.
"Ultimately, we need to do even more to reach these individuals to let them know that their rights have been restored, and to register them in time and then help them vote," he said.
Before Beshear's December order, an estimated 312,000 Kentuckians — 9% of the population — couldn't vote because of a felony conviction, one of the highest rates in the country, according to a 2016 report from the Sentencing Project, a research and advocacy group that studies incarceration and racial disparities in the criminal justice system.
Kentucky was long one of only a few states that bar felons from voting unless they successfully petition the governor to restore their rights.
Beshear's order, which came two days after taking office, automatically restored voting rights to felons who have completed sentences, including probation or parole, and does not apply to people convicted of a list of crimes considered violent under state law including rapes, sexual abuses, homicide and assault, along with treason and election bribery.
The move was in part meant to help ameliorate the disproportionate impact that disenfranchisement has on Black voters and some neighborhoods, where criminal justice disparities and felon voting laws have diluted voting power over time.
West Louisville resident Stephon Harbin, 48, whose felony convictions stem in part from selling drugs decades ago, has seen it firsthand. But for him too, the primary marked his first election since getting rights restored. He voted early by mail because he worried about long Election Day lines.
"It felt awesome. I took pictures," he said, adding that he was thrilled "for the first time in my lifetime to be able to have a voice."
He said the historic moment, where protests have led to changes, from the police chief's dismissal to an end to no-knock warrants, has meant "more people being active, talking about voting. Before it was, Go vote? For what? Why would we waste your time voting?"
James Thomas, 63, who lives in Louisville's Smoketown neighborhood, voted by mail for the first time since a 1990s drug-related conviction. It felt pivotal, he said, for the same reasons.
"Things aren't going as they should," he said. "There's corruption all up and down the government, from the police department to (Capitol) Hill, and I'm glad I have a vote to express my voice about it," he said.
Jackie McGranahan, 42, a Louisville resident, was thrilled to get her absentee ballot in the mail after getting her voting rights restored after drug-related offenses.
"I'm a Black woman from Eastern Kentucky, and when you look at the rates of incarceration of Black people in Kentucky, and then taking away the right to vote for so many," change is needed, she said. "Watching what the protests accomplished in Louisville, hopefully, that same momentum will spill over into elections."
Some on social media have expressed concern that Louisville, which is home to the state's largest Black population, would have only one polling location. The Booker campaign has cast it as a plan to quash his historic bid to be the first Black nominee in the state Democratic Party's history.
But Louisville NAACP President Raoul Cunningham, a longtime civil rights activist in the state, said he didn't agree with the state's decision to reduce the number of polling places, but he thinks the state should receive credit for allowing mail-in and early voting this year. He predicted the African American vote wouldn't be suppressed.
For Smith, the pandemic meant voting wasn't like he expected. He drove Friday to the state Fairgrounds to cast his ballot in a huge hall. It was." pretty simple" but still a big moment, he said.
Voting hasn't been a tradition in his family, partly because his mother was also disenfranchised, he said. Before he voted, he talked about it with his 8-year-old son, who joined him at recent protests.
He plans to vote again in November, for more education funding and equitable policing and economic opportunity. But mostly, he said, for change.
Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@gannett.com, or follow him on Twitter @chris_kenning
Stephon Harbin, who had his voting rights restored, mails his ballot for the Kentucky primary.
Courtesy of Stephon Harbin
$$$
