Happy to see a positive article
12 July 2020 
In these times of crisis, it was such a pleasure to read Sunday's Scene featuring Patsy Harkess and her remarkable journey to help a friend. She took a bad situation and made it a great opportunity to spread joy and raise money for ALS. Bravo!
Cathy Wessel, Louisville, 40223
Businesses, please monitor mask usage! Since the onset of the coronavirus, my husband and I have become part of an "at-risk population." We are in our 60s feeling vital and healthy. We exercise daily, take vitamins. As a very dear friend said to me, "I didn't feel old until our age was defined as being a group that's vulnerable to the COVID-19 virus." I am asking Kentucky businesses to please enforce the wearing of masks. We love to shop, eat out, try new experiences! After being sandwiched between parents and children, we love taking care of and spoiling ourselves and grandchildren. But we are a careful generation. Unfortunately, if we aren't happy with conditions of the stores, we will forego stores and stay home where we feel safe, less exposed to the virus and purchase online. Please hear me when I say masks being worn by employees on their chin, below the nose is not good enough. We don't want to feel like we are putting our life in danger of the virus as we venture outside of our homes.
Jill Ginsburg, Louisville, 40222
Voting by mail There's too much at stake – we must expand vote-by-mail now.
Do you know who's voting by mail this election? Donald Trump. And do you know who's making it harder for everyone else in the country to vote by mail in the middle of a global pandemic? That's right – Donald Trump.
He and other White House officials have gone on record with false claims against mail-in voting, even though it's one of the safest options for us to cast our ballots as the country recovers from this pandemic.
In the face of Trump's hypocrisy, I expect Congress to do the right thing and provide both economic relief and expanded funding for no-excuse absentee voting, early voting and other options to make voting safer this November. These are all common-sense reforms that a vast majority of Americans support and changes that would help increase voter participation during and after this crisis.
Congress has the ability to act right now, and we need to make sure our representatives know that anything less than immediate action is unacceptable.
Paula Dumont, Louisville, 40228
Booker vs. Broihier Mr. Bailey, Please remember that Mike Broihier announced last July while Charles Booker didn't announce until January. Charles leaped into the spotlight and gained a lot of attention and support with the Black Lives Matter protests over the murders of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor. It was his "moment." Charles is a gifted man and I hope he runs for mayor.
But it's not fair to imply Mike, who was in the race before Charles, was a spoiler. There were also five other Democrats in that race and one of them got 11,000 votes. While I will support Amy McGrath, I'm still convinced that Mike's broad and deep resume made him the strongest candidate to unseat Mitch McConnell.
Ruthanne A. Wolfe, Louisville, 40204
The mayor and governor must act Dear Mayor Fischer and Gov. Andy Beshear, both of you deserve to be impeached or thrown out of office for not protecting our basic constitutional rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. These are guaranteed by the Constitution. Let me explain why I say these have been trampled on. Law-abiding citizens are fearful of going downtown due to the shootings and roaming road blocks. We were instructed by city officials to avoid downtown, instead of clearing the streets and making them safe. Business owners are losing money due to no commerce along with no tourism. Who wants to come to a war zone? The pursuit of happiness is also being trampled on because no one is happy with the current unrest in Louisville. Law-abiding citizens, who agree that the shooting of Ms. Taylor was a tragedy that should not have happened, are angry that our city is being destroyed. This is not the answer. Mayor and Governor, you must help settle the issues before this city is irreparably harmed, if it isn't too late.
James Maxfield, Louisville, 40219
Insane lines at for driver's license renewal On July 1, I arrived at the driver's license bureau near Bowman Field at 7 a.m. and the lot was half full and I waited in line with over 70 people in front of me. I don't mean to complain, but during a pandemic this is insane. My question to our Kentucky Legislature is simple: Why not change the system to fit your constituents' needs? Both voting and driver's license renewal can be done either by mail or the internet and it will protect the employees and the public. It would be a win win situation.
William J. Giesin, Louisville, 40242
$$$
