Protesters planning 'massive demonstration' Tuesday
Gardner, Hayes
25 Aug 2020
National social justice organization Until Freedom is planning a "massive demonstration throughout Louisville" on Tuesday, and the Louisville Metro Police Department has designated it as an "All Work-Day" in response, meaning all LMPD personnel will be available for duty.
Until Freedom's leaders, who were behind the sit-in at Attorney General Daniel Cameron's house on July 14 that resulted in 87 arrests, have been in Louisville for the past month and say the group is here "indefinitely," as it protests in the name of Breonna Taylor and racial justice.
The New York-based organization has encouraged participants of Tuesday's protest to gather at South Central Park at 2 p.m. and says they will march six-tenths of a mile to the LMPD Training Academy, which is in the southern part of Louisville, a couple of blocks from Churchill Downs.
The direct action is scheduled for 5 p.m., and after arriving at the academy, Until Freedom leadership said the protesters will continue to another location but did not disclose where.
Social media rumors have circulated in recent days warning of multiple groups visiting town and of protesters using 600 to 700 cars to shut down major thoroughfares, but Mayor Greg Fischer has said the rumors are out of control.
Police Maj. Aubrey Gregory said Monday that the department has heard of other groups besides Until Freedom that may be demonstrating Tuesday but that none are confirmed.
He said he anticipates buses of protesters coming to town, and that there is a chance demonstrators plan to block roadways.
"That's some of the information we're hearing," Gregory said. "Some of our information we've received, some of those rumors, do include potential traffic shutdowns, peaceful sit-ins, if you will, on the roadways, and we're prepared to respond to that."
Fischer said his hope and expectation is that the protests will be peaceful.
"Violence or property destruction is unacceptable and will be addressed immediately," Fischer said.
Protests in Louisville have continued for 89 days as local marchers demand systemic change and the prosecution of the three police officers involved in the death of Taylor, a Black woman who was unarmed when she was fatally shot in her apartment during a narcotics raid that turned up no drugs.
Attorney General Cameron, who is speaking Tuesday night in the Republican National Convention, recently said that his office does not plan to make an announcement regarding the case this week.
The Not F****** Around Coalition, a national Black militia, demonstrated in downtown Louisville on July 25 and said it would return four weeks later, which was this past Saturday.
But the group has made no indication that it will be in town Tuesday. Instead, the group announced intentions to return to Louisville on Sept. 5, the day of the Kentucky Derby.
Until Freedom says it will apply "Kingian Nonviolence" — a philosophy in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr. — during Tuesday's protest.
Participants in its events over the weekend were asked to sign release of liability waivers that stated, "I am aware that these activities are hazardous activities and that I could be seriously injured or even mortality."
Linda Sarsour, one of the group's co-founders, has called the fact that LMPD will be using its entire police force on Tuesday a "provocation."
"We're really looking at this as a march, mobilizing as many people as we can," she said. "There may be a disruption, there may be some sort of civil disobedience, but that's up to the Louisville Metro Police Department, it's not up to us."
Adrian Baker, an activist and the student body president of Louisville Presbyterian Theological Seminary, was one of the 87 arrested on July 14, and he noted that Until Freedom does not have a history of violent action.
"There will be no peace until we find justice, but we will be nonviolent," Baker said.
Reporter Tessa Duvall contributed to this article. Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
More inside
Learn about organization vowing to protest "Indefinitely" in Louisville. 8A
Sybrina Denise Fulton hugs Tamika Palmer during a press conference Monday at Simmons College in Louisville featuring family members of those who have died at the hands of vigilantes and police. Fulton is the mother of Trayvon Martin and Palmer is the mother of Breonna Taylor.
$$$