Armed 'patriot' groups to rally downtown
Costello, Darcy; Kobin, Billy
26 June 2020
Counterprotesters that include "armed 'patriot' groups" may come to downtown Louisville on Saturday, according to social media posts and a Facebook event acknowledged by police.
The posts suggest a counterprotest to the ongoing racial justice demonstrations in Jefferson Square Park over the Breonna Taylor shooting.
Screenshots of Facebook posts that were shared with The Courier Journal show users discussing the protesters who have set up tents and camped out in the park over the past few weeks to raise awareness about the deaths of Breonna Taylor and George Floyd.
"They have til the 27th to have their fun," one poster said. "On the 27th we will have ours."
"The tents need to be destroyed," another said.
In a statement, Louisville Metro Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said police are "aware of the social media posts" suggesting a counterprotest is planned.
"Over the past few weeks, there have been several social media posts about planned protest, so it is difficult to know exactly who will show up on Saturday," Halladay wrote. "However, LMPD will be prepared to handle the situation."
She declined to go into specifics about "tactics or plans" but said police would be staffed to "address the situation as best we can."
Mayor Greg Fischer tweeted Thursday afternoon that his office is "aware of rumors suggesting that armed militia are coming to downtown Louisville this weekend."
"Our message is simple: We don't need you here," Fischer tweeted. "Our focus is on facilitating peaceful protests."
Screenshots suggest a Facebook group named the "American Freedom Fighters" is behind Saturday's rally, with some posters saying it is meant to "support law enforcement and help clean and take back Louisville."
In one video shared Wednesday on social media, a reported member of the American Freedom Fighters says he "just got off the phone with a major of the LMPD."
"We had a conversation about what we're planning for this weekend, and they are 100% in full support of what we are doing, and they actually lit up a little bit when I said we're coming," the person says in the video. "And, uh, his exact words were, you know, he's ready for a hopeful, relaxing weekend, so the police are supporting us.
"I told them we're coming in peace. I told them we're going to be armed. I told them we are politically neutral, but the police is definitely aware and they are in 100% support of this movement we're doing. ... Just have faith and know that everything is going as planned and everything will be directed by the police."
In response to that video, Halladay said as the agency does "with all anticipated protest activity, LMPD makes an effort to reach out to organizers to get an understanding of what to expect during a particular protest event."
"LMPD personnel did reach out to organizers of this group planning to counter-protest this weekend to get information for our planning purposes, but in no way did LMPD express support for any disruptive actions being taken by this group or any other," Halladay said. "We support everyone's right to free speech and expression. Our role is to make sure that takes place in as safe an environment as possible."
Organizers behind the Jefferson Square Park gathering and protests for racial justice are holding their own event called "Louisville Against Outside Agitators," which also is scheduled for Saturday morning at Jefferson Square Park.
The "Derbycity Autonomous Collective" is listed as the event host and describes itself on Facebook as a "group of individuals focused on creating a community where people feel safe, welcome, cared for, and have the ability to learn new things."
The event description criticizes "armed out of town agitators" who "will be driving in from Indiana, Tennessee and other parts of Kentucky to our downtown, intending to bully Louisvillians with their firearms and divisive ideologies."
Ryan Nichols, the president of the local Fraternal Order of Police chapter representing LMPD officers, said Wednesday he'd heard about a potential counterprotest but had heard no details on what groups might be attending.
He said he hadn't seen anything official from LMPD about it but noted that "we've had those instances before," pointing to 2018's counterprotest to the Occupy ICE rally that involved members of the Three Percenters militia group.
"That's happened here before, and (the police) handled that situation," Nichols said. "I would assume they'd handle this situation very similarly."
The July 2018 demonstrations drew hundreds to the area outside the federal immigration building on Seventh Street.
The groups were separated by barricades and spent hours hurling chants and insults at one another, as police monitored the scene. No violence broke out.
Protests over the deaths of Taylor, a 26-year-old ER tech who was inside her Louisville apartment in March when police fatally shot her during a drug raid, and other Black Americans at the hands of police have continued in the city for nearly 30 straight days.
Although the demonstrations over the past month have featured largely peaceful scenes, some nights have included violence, looting, property damage and police firing tear gas and pepper bullets at protesters.
Demonstrators have called for the three LMPD officers who fired their weapons in Taylor's death to be terminated and face criminal charges.
On Tuesday, one of those officers, Brett Hankison, was fired for his actions in Taylor's death.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello.
Protesters stand with their hands up at a memorial to Breonna Taylor after police arrived in Jefferson Square Park on June 18
$$$
