Protests 'a movement,' not halting in wake of Louisville's tragedies
Gardner, Hayes
05 July 2020
It happened in a moment, in one fleeting, irreversible moment.
Steven Lopez, a disturbed, homeless man and a regular at the Jefferson Square Park protests, was seen firing several gunshots at the park on the night of June 27, killing 27-year-old photographer Tyler Gerth.
Protester Chris Fox spoke with Lopez just before the shooting, and he was about 10 feet from Lopez at that fateful moment, now seared into his memory. Fox said he pulled out a gun of his own and aimed it at Lopez but didn't pull the trigger. He feels guilty about that now.
Despite his best efforts, Fox didn't sleep that night.
"All I see when I close my eyes is the bullet wound in this guy's face," Fox said as a teardrop rolled down his cheek Sunday. "I don't take pills or anything. I don't believe in them. But I'm probably going to need to get put on something after this. I'm pretty ... traumatized."
For many demonstrators who have protested the killing of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police for more than a month, the death right in front of their eyes is simply too much to discuss. They're hurting. A grief counselor set up a table at the park on Monday.
Gerth's senseless death is traumatizing. It's scary. And for many protesters, it's personal.
"It makes everybody uneasy," said protester Issa Fixit, whose Facebook profile picture is a black-and-white photo that Gerth took.
That's because so many knew Gerth. And also because of where he died, in the middle of a small park, no more than an acre or two, which protesters have made their home base.
"Damn. I was just right there," protester Montez Jones said of the well-trodden sidewalk where Gerth was shot, now inhabited by a memorial in his honor. "I was just standing where Tyler died."
But protests haven't stopped, and instead the name Tyler Gerth has joined Breonna Taylor's and David McAtee's in chants. A vigil for Gerth, whom Black activists called a white ally, was held at Jefferson Square Park on June 28, and protesters blocked the Second Street Bridge Monday morning, just over 12 hours later. They marched in the streets Monday evening and continued to protest on Tuesday night, resulting in 20 arrests.
Former NBA champion Stephen Jackson, a close friend of George Floyd's, spoke at a Black Culture Sunday event at Cox Park less than a day after Gerth died, but Gerth was not a focus of the rally. Instead, the bulk of the more than a dozen speakers repeated the same idea when describing the protests of the past month: "This is not a moment. It's a movement."
In Louisville, it's a movement that began with a moment, one fleeting, irreversible moment, when 26-year-old Taylor was killed by several gunshots, and it's continued with moments over the past 36 days of protests.
There have been clashes with police and protesters, the killing of McAtee on June 1, peaceful demonstrations, performances, empowering marches and words. It all encompasses a momentous movement — taking place in 18 countries and all 50 states, as Jackson pointed out — of change that includes George Floyd and Breonna Taylor and now Tyler Gerth.
More than singular moments, however, the protests are about systemic change.
"From law enforcement to judicial to health care to education to housing," protester Carmen Jones explained in June.
Louisville passed Breonna's Law, eliminating no-knock warrants, and the Louisville Metro Police Department fired Brett Hankison, one of the three officers involved in Taylor's killing. But that has not pacified the protesters, who took to the park yet again this week.
Instead of being extinguished, the flames of protest have only been fanned by continued marching and outside attention.
At the Kentucky state Capitol on June25, a crowd of more than 500 gathered, traveling from Louisville, Lexington, and even out of state, to protest deaths from police violence. They bluntly called out leaders such as Attorney General Daniel Cameron and Gov. Andy Beshear. One group drove up from Atlanta that morning as celebrities such as Jada Pinkett Smith and Common shared powerful moments, speaking about national change and about Taylor specifically.
"This is what we do, y'all," Common told the crowd. "We come together during these times, and we start excelling and progressing forward."
The four-hour rally took place under a baking sun that led at least three attendees to seek medical help, likely from the heat, but protesters still remained for the duration. Fatigue has never had much of a role in the movement.
"I couldn't be tired of that," protester Shea Lewis said in June of protesting. "Being tired would be like I'm tired of being a Black woman. This is my life."
Demonstrations in Louisville have now lasted five weeks.
"This is big. This is historic," protester Montez Jones said this week, gesturing to Jefferson Square Park. "This is most definitely a movement. If it was a moment, it wouldn't be 33 days."
Protests grabbed national headlines with fervor in late May. And they grabbed attention on social media with Blackout Tuesday on June 2, a full month ago, when millions of Instagram users posted a black square in an effort to protest deaths from police violence.
To an extent, though, headlines and social media attention have dissipated. The moment has passed. But protesters in Louisville have marched each day since, as more moments — peaceful ones, terrifying ones, powerful ones, devastating ones — build toward a continuing movement.
"People think this is just a moment," protester Kenna Mink said. "We have to keep moving."
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Rapper Common delivers a poem during a rally on the steps of the Kentucky state Capitol on June 25.
$$$
