LENDING A HAND
19 June 2020
What happens when one of the only grocery stores in a community closes during an already difficult time? The community jumps into action.
When the Kroger at 26th and Broadway began boarding up its storefront the day after David McAtee was shot and killed by the Kentucky National Guard, Shauntrice Martin and Taylor Ryan were nearby. They were among the crowd that had gathered to mourn the popular barbecue restaurant owner and protest his shooting, the latest in a number of high profile killings across the country of Black people by law enforcement.
But Ryan, executive director of the nonprofit Change Today Change Tomorrow, and Martin, a volunteer with the organization and CEO of Lnee Research & Development, were doing more than attending.
"We were passing out food at (the) peaceful protest," Martin said, "helping keep the crowd in a designated area. Kroger started shuttering and then announced they would close indefinitely."
This was yet another blow to a part of Louisville that's among the hardest hit by food insecurities with some of the worst access to fresh food, according to a Courier Journal report from 2019.
The coronavirus pandemic had only compounded the challenges residents of west Louisville face, and with Kroger boarding up, nearby residents would be at risk of not having access to food, Martin said.
So "that night I came up with an idea and texted Taylor, 'hey do you think we could handle this?'" Martin said. "Being the leader she is, she agreed. We stayed up till two or three in the morning making flyers and volunteer forms."
That's how #FeedTheWest was born, an initiative that provides food to people in west Louisville affected by food deserts.
The team put out an action call on Facebook, Ryan said. And "that day just happened to be a day that people were ready to act," said Martin.
When they woke up the next day, "there were hundreds of inquiries for both food and volunteers as well as donations," Martin said. They were off and running. Friends and local partners offered up distribution sites and other infrastructure help, and grocery and financial donation began to pour in.
Some 7,000 people have been served by #FeedTheWest with more than half a million dollars in groceries since June 3. It's raised more than $216,000, and funds also go to support Breonna's Law, which bans police from serving no-knock warrants.
"A lot of people who first donated were there and saw the Kroger being shut down," said Martin. And that closure was what spurred this action, she said, not the later looting at the store.
While the Kroger store at 26th and Broadway did reopen June 3 with limited hours, the #FeedTheWest program continues. It's something Martin and Ryan said is needed in a community that has long struggled with food access.
Now that they have some infrastructure in the emergency program, including donations drop-off sites and distribution centers, the next question is how to partner to get a more viable, sustainable program "that takes into account the racial injustice and food insecurity that has been really prevalent in the West End. So that's our main focus — we want partners who can help us make that happen," Martin said.
What kind of difference can regular access to fresh food make? It's truly a matter of life and death.
"The first thing that is going to do is improve the life expectancy of people in the West End," said Martin. "There have been several reports, including the 2011 Louisville Metro Health Equity Report, talking about the fact that there is ... a 10- to 15-year disparity, so a person in a West End zip code lives 10 to 15 years less than a person in a more affluent zip code."
And it makes a difference in every aspect of injustice, she said. "When people are hungry, other things suffer."
"This is about making sure that our folks have just as good of a life as anyone else in any other zip code," Martin said.
"Our plan is really to develop a sustainable model where people can get food justice, racial justice, work on environmental justice all under the umbrella of having sustainable food options to take into account the years of redlining, and other types of discrimination against both Black people and impoverished people in general," she added.
And the impact goes beyond those receiving the donated groceries.
"I've seen so many of our volunteers go from being like, 'OK, I'm going to drop off groceries, but that's not going to change anything,'" Martin said, "to them being ambassadors for us."
Several volunteers have said, "I feel like now there's something I can do that is tangible, that is real,'" Martin said. "Not just the delivering groceries part, but being part of the conversation on how do we make this sustainable, how do we create independent sources of wealth-building, food justice, these sorts of things. The realization ... has been eye-opening for a lot of our young people.'"
"We should always call out injustice, but we can simultaneously create our own institutions," Martin said. "And within that, I feel like there has been a lot of change. And that's beautiful to me."
Tell Dana! Send your restaurant "Dish" to Dana McMahan at thecjdish@gmail.com and follow @danamac on Twitter.
The Dish
Dana McMahan
Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
Want to help #FeedTheWest?
IN-PERSON: Organizers need help at all sites to bag and deliver groceries. Sign up at change-today.org/volunteer/. Note: if you have been protesting, please do not volunteer in person (but they are working on other ways you can help).
The team also needs administrative support to help with tasks such as responding to help requests. Email changetodaychangetomorrow @gmail.com for more details.
GROCERIES: Check facebook.com/pg/ChangeToday ChangeTomorrow for daily lists of grocery items needed. Note: organizers encourage you to shop at local shops whenever possible.
DONATIONS: visit change-today.org/feedthewest/ for Venmo and Cash app giving details.
Volunteers pack up bags of food for #FeedtheWest, an initiative that provides food to African Americans in west Louisville affected by food deserts.
#FeedtheWest is an initiative that provides food and educational resources to African Americans in west Louisville affected by food deserts.
$$$
