Judge blocks Metro Council's subpoena attempt in probe
Costello, Darcy
12 Aug 2020
A judge has temporarily blocked the Louisville Metro Council's attempt to subpoena the chief of public safety in its investigation into the mayor's handling of the Breonna Taylor protests.
The order from Judge Audra Eckerle came a day after Metro Government sued all 26 Metro Council members, seeking to ensure that any testimony from Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess and interim LMPD Chief Rob Schroeder be held in executive session.
Eckerle ruled in favor of Metro Government and set a hearing on the lawsuit for Aug. 24.
That means the subpoena for Hess, who had been asked to testify in open session before the council's Government Oversight and Audit Committee on Aug. 17, will not be enforced under the order.
Joey Klausing, an attorney representing Schroeder, who was also subpoenaed, said Tuesday that he planned to file a motion to intervene in the court case and seek the same relief the court granted for Hess.
The council committee initiated an investigation in July looking into Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, David McAtee's death and protests in the city.
Attorneys write in Metro Government's lawsuit that the administration cooperated with the investigation and agreed to have Hess and Schroeder testify.
But then, it says, a sweeping federal civil rights lawsuit filed before the committee hearing completely overlapped the topics the committee hoped to discuss.
That led to a fiery committee hearing last week, in which Hess and Schroeder appeared in person but declined through attorneys to testify unless the committee went into closed session.
The committee's chairman, Councilman Brent Ackerson, D-26th District, soundly refused, disagreeing with the legal argument.
The committee then voted 10-1 to authorize subpoenas for Hess and Schroeder, as a way for a judge to decide whether the officials should testify.
Since then, the lawsuit says, Hess' attorney offered to have her testify in the first week of September or to present other witnesses. Those offers were ignored, the suit said.
"Chief Hess and Chief Schroeder have nothing to hide and remain willing to testify in executive session, or in an open session at a future date when doing so will not adversely impact (the federal lawsuit)," the lawsuit said.
Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, the vice chairman of the committee conducting the investigation, said he was "disappointed" by the route the officials chose.
"It is ... incredibly frustrating, but this is what it's come to," Piagentini said at the committee's Tuesday meeting. "This council has done nothing but try to be open to the public, to get the truth out to the public. We will continue to pursue that."
Prior to the committee's subpoenas, following the federal civil rights lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, Hess and Schroeder were expected to testify about:
Vandalism and the response to it
Use of tear gas and/or pepper balls
How the media became a "target," including the WAVE 3 reporter and cameraman who were shot at with nonlethal weapons
Directives given by leadership and any confusion
Any "stand down" orders that were issued
How law enforcement came to be at 26th and Broadway the night McAtee was shot and killed.
The committee and attorneys representing Hess and Schroeder had previously agreed not to center the questions on the deaths of Taylor and McAtee, as they are under pending investigation. Taylor's death is the subject of investigations by the state attorney general and FBI, while McAtee's is being investigated by Kentucky State Police.
Lonita Baker, an attorney representing Taylor's family, said that Fischer had campaigned and talked about transparency through his tenure as mayor, but that the lawsuit proved he was less concerned about transparency and "more about limiting the city's liability."
"The only way this city heals is for the truth to be made public," Baker said.
Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, added in an emailed statement from attorneys: "We have been waiting too long to get to the bottom of what happened to Breonna. Enough is enough."
In an email, Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter said the administration was not trying to avoid having Louisville Metro Government speak in open session.
"As outlined in our letter to Council and in the lawsuit, we sought only to push back the testimony until after counsel had an opportunity to fully review the ACLU lawsuit, which named some LMG staff in their official capacity," Porter wrote.
$$$
