Fischer named president of mayors group
Costello, Darcy
01 July 2020
Mayor Greg Fischer will take over as president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors on Wednesday, poised to speak on behalf of America's mayors for the next year at a challenging time for Louisville and the nation.
Fischer told The Courier Journal in an interview there is "no better time" to serve as leader, arguing that this time of "pain and change" — a pandemic, an economic recession and mass protests for racial justice — offers an opportunity to bring about positive results and create a better Louisville and a better America.
"There's never been a more dynamic time of opportunity to jump on this," he said. "As a seasoned mayor with a strong streak of justice and truth and improvement, I'm hopeful that it can really lead to great things for our city and the country."
Fischer was formally approved in a Tuesday afternoon vote by the U.S. Conference of Mayor's Executive Committee, but the position has been years in the making for Fischer, who has been tapped by his peers to serve in leadership for the past few years.
In a speech Wednesday, Fischer is expected to outline his priorities as president.
His national agenda will include raising the federal minimum wage to combat poverty, encouraging Congress to pass legislation to study and develop reparation proposals, supporting historically black colleges and universities, and urging Congress to approve more relief for cities and states being hit by COVID-19.
In Louisville, however, some are questioning the timing of Fischer's ascent to a national platform, given turmoil in the city and intense criticisms of his leadership.
Fischer has faced calls to resign, including from state Rep. Attica Scott, D-Louisville, and criticism from all sides — police, protesters, the Metro Council and nationally.
Vashti Proctor, a local organizer who has been working to build awareness about Fischer's new position on social media, said in an interview Tuesday she was spurred to organize against his role as she watched him fail to act on "bringing justice to Breonna Taylor, addressing police brutality, political corruption and then also the lack of funding to Black youth and Black young adults."
"When I think of a leader and the way in which our times are changing, I think of us having an equitable community for all," Proctor said. "For the past 10 years, I have seen Mayor Fischer really let down Black and brown communities."
"And so, it's just very alarming that the U.S. Conference (of Mayors) will allow Greg Fischer to lead."
'Opportunity ... to do good' Fischer sees the upcoming year as a chance for an "American breakthrough."
It's a time, he argues, to take steps forward in addressing systemic racism, poverty, police reform and health equity. And he sees Louisville's challenges as national challenges, requiring an "American solution."
"Think about this time of opportunity for us as mayors: We have a pandemic. We have an economic recession. And we have a fight for racial justice going on in our country right now," he is expected to say in a Wednesday speech.
"The amount of opportunity that we have to do good for our citizens and our country has never been better."
In a Tuesday interview, asked if he expected to become president under such intense conditions, Fischer said he'd written his theme for the year three times as events changed across the country.
He'd first planned to talk about human values and compassion, then shifted as the pandemic took root and shifted it again as the recession set in and marches for racial justice took place across the country.
And he stressed that amid the challenges, he sees hope.
"This is our moment as mayors to rally all that energy on behalf of our citizens and rally all that energy on behalf of justice and to make sure that Washington, D.C., is hearing us loud and clear," his speech will say.
'The timing couldn't be worse' For all of his optimism, Fischer is also facing criticism about the new position.
Past presidents have told The Courier Journal that Louisville stands to gain from having its mayor in the spotlight: "You'll have your name on the map, that's for sure," said Mayor Elizabeth Kautz of Burnsville, Minnesota.
But locally, organizers have pushed back against Fischer's new role. And many onlookers are questioning whether now is the right time to take on a national position or whether Fischer is the right person to lead the group.
"The timing couldn't be worse," said Councilwoman Paula McCraney, D-7th District. "We need leadership here in Louisville. And our eye should not be off the ball."
Demonstrations calling for racial justice have taken place at the park outside his office for more than a month, with many frustrated by his refusal to fire the officers involved in Breonna Taylor's death. (He has since terminated one's employment.)
The Metro Council has initiated an investigation into Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, a fatal police shooting from March 13 that remains under review by outside agencies, along with his handling of the police response to protesters.
It begs the question, Scott said, why mayors of the largest cities in America would want a leader who has "failed" to address the protest for Black lives in Louisville.
"Where's he going to lead you?" she asked.
And Proctor, the local organizer, said those national goals Fischer has set won't lead to local demands being met, including firing the officers involved in Taylor's shooting.
"This isn't an American problem. This is a problem where you put people in leadership roles (who) abuse that power," Proctor said.
Asked how he would respond to protesters who may agree with his national platform but who remain frustrated by local actions that haven't been taken, Fischer pointed to the steps the city has taken, including suspending, then banning no-knock warrants and initiating the creation of a civilian review board with subpoena powers.
And, in response to concerns that he may be dividing his attention between Louisville and national issues at a time when the city needs leadership, Fischer said his No. 1 focus has always been Louisville, and that it would stay that way.
That was echoed Tuesday by former New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu, a past president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.
"This is an extraordinary moment," Landrieu said. "At the end of the day, you always have to assess your leaders and take stock in who they are, and if they're honest, and if they're open, and if they're working hard, and if they've got the right heart.
"I think we're in uncharted territory, but you know, I would not have any hesitation to have him by my side."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer speaks during a press conference at Central Park after the firing of LMPD Chief Steve Conrad on June 1.
$$$
