Officers walk out on mayor, claiming lack of support
Costello, Darcy
04 June 2020
Dozens of Louisville Metro Police officers walked out on Mayor Greg Fischer at a roll call Wednesday in a sign of protest that the Fraternal Order of Police president said reflects officers' frustration with his leadership.
A video obtained by The Courier Journal shows Fischer standing in the middle of a large room as streams of officers and detectives file out wordlessly. FOP President Ryan Nichols, who was not present, said the move was an unplanned reaction to Fischer's appearance.
"They feel completely unsupported and disrespected by this administration," Nichols said. "They feel whatever he was going to say would have been nothing more than lip service, and he does not care about them at all."
Frustrations have been mounting in the police department, where tensions are high among officers who have been responding to demonstrations since May 28. Some of those protests have led to violence.
Police have deployed pepper bullets and tear gas to disperse demonstrations, which they've said have included items of concern and potential weapons against officers such as bricks, fireworks, leaf blowers, Molotov cocktails, shields and jars.
Maj. David Allen, who oversees LMPD's Administrative Services Division, said Tuesday that jars have been thrown with "gasoline in them, urine (and) a mixture with vomit in it." On Wednesday, interim Chief Robert Schroeder said a SWAT vehicle had taken fire during overnight protests.
Protesters, too, have been frustrated with police and city leadership for their response to the mass gatherings — questioning why they have been broken up before curfew and why the National Guard was summoned.
The guard and LMPD shot and killed David McAtee, a barbecue shop owner, in western Louisville early Monday morning — further exacerbating tensions between police and protesters demanding justice for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot and killed by officers in her Louisville apartment on March 13.
Many officers, Nichols said, don't feel Fischer's team has been supporting law enforcement amid protests that have been "directed and focused against police."
"We're deep into multiple days of rioting and violence ... and they're working in treacherous conditions," Nichols said. "And this is the first opportunity that the leader of our city and this police department has given them to address them?"
A member of LMPD who was at the roll call said people walked away from the mayor when he came over to talk, adding that they "didn't want to be patronized."
Fischer responded in a statement Thursday evening, saying, "The men and women of LMPD are putting in long hours. They are suffering insults and assaults from people they are working to protect. They are worried for their families and this city. They are frustrated, and some of them expressed that frustration today. I absolutely respect that."
Police tensions with Fischer came to a head on Wednesday, after Fischer called for a "top-to-bottom" review of the department, which sparked a sharp rebuke from the FOP's Twitter account before tweets were later deleted.
"Maybe @louisvillemayor should put out an RFP to review his corrupt administration that cares about NO ONE in this city," one tweet said. "@louisvillemayor may pretend to be compassionate, but he's allowing good people of all races and neighborhoods to be victimized by violent criminals."
Nichols said he didn't post the tweets and was still reviewing what was posted.
But he added that any review of the police force would find many dedicated men and women who show up to protect the public every day.
"If there are any flaws in policies and procedures or voids in leadership, it is a direct result of Mayor Fischer being here the past 10 years and in charge of those things," Nichols said.
Tweets posted on Thursday by the FOP's Twitter account went on to hint at wanting Fischer to leave office: "Can we fire @louisvillemayor for his incompetency and divisive non-compassionate leadership'? #AskingForAFriend."
Nichols stopped short of calling for Fischer to resign.
"I don't know if that's the answer. That's an answer," he said. "He's talked about the need for change and a way to move forward, and that needs to happen on all sides. If he's willing to change and do things better and different, he would have to put that into action. And he would have a lot of ground to make up."
In a separate tweet, the police union said more residents would trust the police "if they weren't being told not to" by Fischer, calling him a "goof."
Fischer has faced intense criticisms from protesters as well. Activists have called for him to ban no-knock warrants, fire the officers involved in Taylor's shooting and decrease police funding.
Fischer was not warmly embraced Tuesday when he joined protesters downtown for the first time, after saying his presence would be a "distraction to our police officers." He addressed a crowd at Jefferson Square Park, calling protests across the country a "wake-up call for the United States of America."
$$$
