Mayor says most protesters are local
Aulbach, Lucas
01 June 2020
Although Louisville officials and their counterparts across the nation have often blamed "out-of-towners" for damaging their cities during recent protests, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said Sunday that most people who have been arrested live in Louisville.
All six people arrested at Friday's Breonna Taylor protests are Louisville residents, their arrest citations show. And of the 40 to 50 people arrested Saturday night, Fischer said Sunday evening, "the vast majority of those, as I understand it, are from Louisville."
Citations connected to each of Saturday's arrests, which would identify where the suspects live, were not available on Sunday. A representative from the clerk's office said he believed they would all be available the following day.
Of the citations that were available Sunday evening, though, the majority concerned individuals who live in Louisville. Residents of Elizabethtown and Frankfort were also arrested, the Saturday citations show, as well as three people from Charlotte, North Carolina.
Instances of looting marred Friday night's protests, which led to officials calling in the National Guard on Saturday and issuing a dusk-to-dawn curfew. But Mikel Carter, 26, of Louisville, was the only person accused in the arrest reports of looting that evening.
Police, who responded to a report of looting at an address connected to a cash advance business on Broadway on Saturday just after 2:30 a.m., said they saw him leaving the building with his arms full of merchandise. He was caught as he tried to flee the scene, his arrest citation said, and the merchandise was recovered.
Carter was charged with third-degree burglary and a number of other minor charges. He was the only person arrested in a looting incident following Friday's protests — all others are accused of refusing to follow dispersal orders and were charged with unlawful assembly.
Steven Holliger, 44, faces an extra charge of disorderly conduct. His arrest citation said he refused to leave the street after being told to do so and tried to break through a police line.
Four others — Cody Carson, 25, John Stephenson, 26, Jessica Arrington and Betheny Patrick — face a single charge of unlawful assembly after police said they failed to disperse when they were told to do so. Those four were arrested by the same officer at the same time (10:15 p.m.) at the same location (Jefferson Park), and their arrest citations, which state they failed to disperse after being told to do so, are nearly identical.
Arrington came alone to the protest on Friday. She was arrested at 10:15 p.m. and was released the next day around 1 p.m., she said, after spending much of the night in a holding cell.
Dozens more were arrested at Saturday night's protests.
"It's punitive," she said on Sunday. "They're trying to keep us in there, in the coronavirus situation, in a punitive way, when we were peacefully protesting. Maybe it was during a riot, but we weren't rioting, and they know that. I get out, and I can't hug my 5-year-old child."
Her lawyer, Karen Faulkner, told The Courier Journal that they planned to fight the charges.
Fischer and Louisville police had initially said that they believed the damage that took place downtown on Friday was done by protesters from out of town who had come to Louisville.
They said they determined that by, among other things, watching license plates and tracking social media posts.
Those out-of-towners won't be here to rebuild after the demonstrations, Fischer said.
Across the nation, where protests have cropped up over the killings of Taylor, George Floyd in Minneapolis and others, other city leaders have also issued statements pointing to out-of-town demonstrators causing the most serious damages.
Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed black woman, was shot and killed by police on March 13 in her Louisville apartment.
Several downtown businesses, including the Omni Louisville Hotel, Eddie Merlot's steakhouse and the CVS on Fourth Street, were damaged and looted Friday night and early Saturday, and many other buildings were vandalized, with windows broken and planters overturned across the area. Other buildings in the area were damaged on Saturday, though looting did not appear to be an issue.
Protesters confront Kentucky State Police under the light of a helicopter during the second night of protest in response to the shooting of EMT Breonna Taylor in her home by Louisville Metro police.
$$$
