'No justice, no Derby'
REPORTS LOUISVILLE COURIER JOURNAL
06 Sep 2020
After a worldwide pandemic delayed the Kentucky Derby by an unprecedented four months, Louisville protesters for racial justice made clear Saturday that COVID-19 would not be the only historic thing about the 146th Run for the Roses.While horses were called to post inside Churchill Downs, hundreds of protesters gathered outside, their rallying cry of "No justice, no peace!" refashioned to "No justice, no Derby!"
The chants were set Saturday evening against the unique backdrop of Louisville's most iconic occasion and the nation's oldest continuously held sporting event. Throughout the day, protesters reiterated demands made repeatedly throughout the summer, including, most forcefully, justice for Breonna Taylor.
"There will be no celebration," said Louisville Urban League President and CEO Sadiqa Reynolds. "There will be no business as usual while we are in pain. Our sister is dead."
Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed Black woman and emergency room technician, was killed by Louisville police during a failed narcotics investigation at her Louisville apartment in March.
Reynolds was among about 300 protesters who gathered at South Central Park for a revival-style gathering before marching to Churchill Downs in advance of the main race.
"Today we have decided you will have no peace, Louisville — no peace until we have our justice," Reynolds told the crowd.
As protesters approached the barns at the back of the track, marchers ratcheted up the noise in an apparent attempt to spook horses inside.
Meanwhile, at the front entrance of Churchill Downs, roughly 100 members of the Not F***ing Around Coalition, or NFAC, positioned themselves across from a line of Louisville Metro Police officers — chain-link fences along Central Avenue separating the two groups.
Inside Churchill Downs, NBC broadcasters showed footage of the protesters and the police and explained that marchers were calling for justice for Taylor. They reported the protests had been peaceful.
Ray Daniels, a Black co-owner of Derby contender Necker Island, told an NBC interviewer just before the race that he supported the protesters and the Black Lives Matter movement, along with Taylor's family's pursuit of "justice."
Daniels and co-owner Greg Harbut, who also is Black, had been urged by some to boycott the race as a statement.
"A wise man told me this morning, 'We cannot give protest versus progress.' For us, this is progress. And so, we want to promote both," Daniels said.
It was a day of contrasting protests.
Earlier Saturday, a group calling itself "patriots," many wearing tactical gear and waving American flags, began a march to the steps of Louisville Metro Hall, across the street from Jefferson Square Park — the epicenter of racial justice protests in the city. Nearly all of them openly displayed weapons.
Dylan Stevens, known online as the personality "The Angry Viking," said he organized the rally to amplify the voices of "American patriots," show support of LMPD officers and stand in opposition to groups that he said threaten chaos in cities, specifically mentioning the NFAC.
Once they arrived, chants of "USA, USA, USA" clashed with echoing cheers of "Breonna Taylor, Breonna Taylor, Breonna Taylor."
"Whose streets?"
"Our streets!"
"Back the blue," chanted the group.
Tensions flared over the next hour, as the two sides verbally collided. While some broke away to have smaller discussions, larger groups formed and, at times, pointed fingers at each other and exchanged heated words.
Those on both sides tried to calm members of their respective groups, with verbal warnings of "no fighting," occasional physical restraints and steps in between people who were arguing nose to nose.
Despite very little police presence in the hour when the two sides clashed, dozens of Louisville police officers in riot gear arrived on the scene as the groups were parting to seemingly separate the groups and move them off the streets and onto the sidewalks.
"Due to the size of the crowd, we determined it was not safe to go in and we did not want to escalate the situation with police presence," LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington said. "Therefore, it was best to stage, call for additional resources to come downtown and see what developed."
LMPD Deputy Chief LaVita Chavous announced Saturday officers had made three arrests related to the protests: one for property damage, one for drug possession and one for gun possession by a felon. There were no arrests in the confrontation between groups downtown.
Melvin Cheeks, 63, was among the protesters encircling Churchill Downs. The continued demonstrations, he said, showed "the powers that be ... they're not listening to the cries of the people."
"So that's what we're just out here doing, we're just out here making them know that we're not giving up," said Meeks, who is Black. "We're still going to continue to protest as long as we possibly can, as long as necessary."
Pushing a triple stroller along the uneven sidewalk, Stephanie Ayo, 31, said she brought her three young sons — 6, 4 and 2 — to the protest to see what it's like to "stand up, no matter how great the fear is, for the people who aren't here, can't be here, and are unnamed."
"My husband and I want to show our boys that if they see unfairness, they'll remember when Mom and Dad took us to this movement."
Her sons carried signs that read: "My brothers' future matters" and "My brothers' lives matter."
Ayo said her sons each have their own reason to be at the protests:
"Equal justice," said Darryl, 6.
"For my brothers," said DeAngelo, 4, from under his Marvel mask.
"To see all the people — not even just Black people — but people, unite for the same thing for the same cause, it's gonna go down in history," said Marcia Lawhorn, of Louisville, who on Saturday afternoon sold "Say Her Name" and "Black Lives Matter" shirts near the racetrack.
Marian Vasser, also of Louisville, agreed. Vasser, executive director of diversity and equity at the University of Louisville, said she was uplifted by the sight of so many people at the march, including "our white brothers and sisters."
"(But) the sun will go down," she said. "The Derby will go away. The decision will come out.
"Then what happens?"
A scuffle ensues after a man wearing a viking helmet hits a Black Lives Matter protester in the face with a megaphone outside Metro Hall.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Armed people walk toward Metro Hall Saturday, chanting, "Whose streets? America's streets" and "USA." The group was organized to amplify the voices of "American patriots," according to its leader.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
With Three Percenters and supporters of President Donald Trump behind him, Dylan Stevens — known as "The Angry Viking" — talks with Breonna Taylor protesters outside Metro Hall on Saturday in downtown Louisville. Those on both sides tried to calm members of their respective groups.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Members of NFAC march along Central Avenue near Churchill Downs on Saturday.
Cara Owsley/Courier Journal
An armed group stands on the steps of Louisville's Metro Hall on Saturday afternoon.
$$$
