Saints' Brees should try listening more
Sullivan, Tim
05 June 2020
Drew Brees was right about this: He needs to talk less and listen more.
The star quarterback of the New Orleans Saints needs to understand that his American experience is not everyone's, and especially not that of many African Americans. He needs to remember that the pledge of allegiance is more aspirational than reality.
Until this divided nation is authentically indivisible, until there is liberty and justice for all, expressing fealty to a flag will be considered a hollow gesture by many Americans. Until the land of the free can come closer to the ideals expressed at its birth, "The Star-Spangled Banner" will elicit rue as well as reverence.
This was the message Brees missed when he simplistically characterized symbolic protests of systemic racism as "disrespecting the flag." This is the message so many have deliberately distorted in condemning (and blackballing) Colin Kaepernick for taking a knee during the national anthem while trivializing the life-and-death root causes of his concerns.
Brees knows this now, or at least he has recognized a need for damage repair after LeBron James joined the broad-based backlash to his initial remarks. After throwing 547 touchdown passes — an NFL career record — the 41-year-old quarterback remains remarkably adept at backpedaling.
"It breaks my heart to know the pain I have caused," Brees said via social media Thursday. "In an attempt to talk about respect, unity, and solidarity centered around the American flag and the national anthem, I made comments that were insensitive and completely missed the mark on the issues we are facing right now as a country.
"They lacked awareness and any type of compassion or empathy. Instead, those words have become divisive and hurtful and have misled people into believing that somehow I am an enemy. This could not be further from the truth, and is not an accurate reflection of my heart or my character."
In an era of qualified contrition — "If I offended anyone, etc. . ." — Brees' apology was unusually unequivocal. On reflection, he appears to have grasped that his narrow, privileged perspective failed to take in the whole field.
Any man with Brees' education and experience should have known better to start with. He should have sensed the anguish and the apprehension that centuries of discrimination and oppression have inflicted on America's black communities.
He should have understood that the deaths of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor at the hands of the police are only the most recent examples of lethal injustice and the resulting protests the inevitable byproduct of institutional indifference.
Though we have come to expect divisive boorishness to be a prominent part of the national dialogue, you would think the quarterback of a team comprised predominantly of black athletes would be better attuned to the sensitivities of this delicate situation.
Former NFL executive Joe Lockhart has written that the Minnesota Vikings should sign Kaepernick as a small step in the healing process. You would think Brees would not have to be publicly shamed by teammate Malcolm Jenkins before realizing he had misread the room.
"If you don't understand how hurtful and insensitive your comments are, you are part of the problem," Jenkins told Brees in a video posted on Twitter. " ... Here we are with the world on fire and you continue to first criticize how we peacefully protest because it doesn't fit with what you do and your beliefs without ever acknowledging the fact that a man was murdered at the hands of police in front of us all and it has been continuing for centuries; that the same brothers that you break the huddle down with every single game, the same guys that you bleed with and go to battle with every single day go home to communities that have been decimated."
You don't have to agree with the form of a protest to appreciate the pain that prompted it.
$$$
