Teachers back their black students
Krauth, Olivia
07 June 2020
Tyra Walker is an educator, a black activist and the daughter of a police officer.
When her teaching peers wanted to join protests against police brutality, they turned to her to organize.
Walker picked Friday for an educator-led protest — it was her day off at her second job at Kroger.
It would have also been Breonna Taylor's birthday.
So, early Friday evening, hundreds of Jefferson County teachers and University of Louisville professors met on the corner of Sixth and Cedar streets.
Many wore red shirts emblazoned with "JCPS teachers stand up for black students." Several carried posters featuring Taylor or signs showing their school's support.
Situated in a segregated city with deeply rooted racial issues, Louisville teachers routinely face the manifestation of systemic problems in their classrooms.
They stand up for their students of color on a daily basis, teachers told The Courier Journal. A wave of protests tackling issues of race has been no exception.
Hundreds have protested nightly in Louisville for more than a week, demanding justice and structural change after Taylor, a 26-year-old unarmed black woman, was shot and killed during a police raid in March.
Jefferson County educators joined them on foot and online, speaking up for the black students that comprise about one-third of the district.
Walker, like many protesters, wants to see the officers involved in Taylor's killing charged. Bigger than that, she wants law enforcement to make a conscious effort to build relationships with Louisville's black community — not just police them.
A handful of teachers were blunt: They want to stop burying their students.
As the protest of hundreds weaved toward Jefferson Square, which has been the epicenter of the demonstrations, one teacher held a neon green poster board.
"LMPD, please stop shooting my students," it read.
Standing up for and with students, particularly those who are disadvantaged, is part of their job, teachers said.
"I'm standing up for black students by using my voice to share information and speak against racism, using my body and voice at protests to amplify black voices and protest black people from undue harm," said Kyrstin Price, a teacher at the Kentucky School for the Blind.
As protests against racial injustices and police brutality sweep the nation, school districts are reflecting on racial inequities and contracts with local police — changes Kentucky's largest school district began months ago.
Taking over in 2017 after years of turmoil in JCPS, Superintendent Marty Pollio began pushing the district to tackle the racial inequities long plaguing its schools.
JCPS is in the midst of a racial equity plan — aiming to reduce the disparity in punishments between black and white students, bring more teachers of color into classrooms and shrink a 30-point gap in achievement between white and black kids.
Facing concerns of how daily police presence at schools was affecting students of color, JCPS' school board axed its contracts with local law enforcement to provide school resource officers nearly a year ago.
With schools out and protests breaking out across the nation, JCPS teachers are continuing that work on their own time.
Matt Kaufmann, Kentucky's high school teacher of the year, got arrested Sunday while peacefully protesting downtown. In subsequent interviews, he turned the focus on the young adults who got arrested alongside him, spotlighting the youths' stories instead of his own.
Some shared lists of articles and books so teachers, who are often white, can educate themselves on racism.
Teachers are buying books for their class libraries that represent students of all racial backgrounds. An English teacher said her students told her they want to see more core texts that discuss racism and white privilege, too.
One band director said he plans to feature more pieces from black composers next year. A skilled trades teacher said he actively looks for craftsmen of color to invite to speak to students.
More can, and should, be done, educators said.
Michelle Pennix, a former elementary school principal, told the crowd Friday she wants schools to seriously reduce suspensions — especially those of black students, who are disproportionately punished compared with their white peers.
It is no longer acceptable to have a majority black student body and no administrators of color, she added.
And later, addressing a gathering of predominantly young adults, Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Charles Booker implored schools to do more cultural competency and restorative practices, which focus on building trust and talking out issues instead of punitive discipline.
All want a better education and life for their black students, educators said while gathering Friday.
More than 1,000 of their current and former students had organized their own protest around the same time.
After marching through downtown from the waterfront, they met up with their educators near Metro Hall and the Hall of Justice.
Our students are here, someone said.
Moments later, the teachers joined the current and former students in the street, marching west on Jefferson as the students led the way.
Breonna Taylor's image is displayed on Metro Hall on Friday evening.
$$$
