New mural of Taylor will be visible from space
Ladd, Sarah
04 July 2020
Breonna Taylor's likeness will soon be visible from space by satellite thanks to a new ground mural community project in Maryland.
The "large-scale" mural, which The Associated Press reported will be 7,000 square feet, will be installed Saturday and Sunday in the Parole neighborhood in Annapolis, Maryland, according to Future History Now, a partner in the project.
Taylor's face and the words "Black Lives Matter" will be painted on basketball courts at a park in the area in a joint endeavor between Future History Now, the Banneker-Douglass Museum and the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture. Additional support will come from the Greater Parole Community Association, Chambers Park, the city of Annapolis, Mayor Gavin Buckley and Annapolis Recs and Park, according to the museum.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Louisville emergency room technician, was in her South End apartment when Louisville Metro police fatally shot her eight times just before 1 a.m. on March 13 while serving a search warrant as a part of a narcotics investigation.
She died in her hallway.
Taylor's death led to more than a month of ongoing protests of Louisville, and her name has been shared around the country as celebrities, politicians and influencers have called for the officers involved in her death to be prosecuted.
"This effort is not intended to be a performative distraction from real policy changes, but rather a form of using peaceful and artistic means to express distress, giving a voice to those who need to be heard and to have their humanity recognized," Future History Now wrote about the project. "We want our future leaders to experience this pivotal moment in history in an active and positive way."
According to Future History Now, $7,000 has been raised so far for the project out of an $8,000 goal. Donations can be made at secure.squarespace.com/checkout/donate?donatePageId=5a720acc9140b77f7878bab9.
Per Future History Now, artists and leaders Deonte Ward, Comacell Brown, Luther Wright, Chanel Compton, Jeff Huntington and Julia Gibb will lead the project.
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com.
The Breonna Taylor ground mural will be in Maryland.
Rendering provided: Courtesy the Banneker-Douglass Museum
$$$
