Bars' suit over COVID-19 rules sad and infuriating
01 Sep 2020
I'm a 40205 resident, two blocks from the Dundee Tavern, and I find it somewhere between sad and infuriating that the bar has filed suit against Gov. Beshear's healthy-at-work policies for social distancing and limiting numbers.If Dundee Tavern has lost money during the pandemic, it sure isn't evident because it seems they've merely taken their raucous, cheerful, crowded (or hoping to be crowded) sports bar environment outdoors. Just as restaurants reopened to seated customers, they erected a huge tent right outside their front door, added outdoor live music all of us hear from our front porches blocks away, and began packing customers onto a square of asphalt that used to be a parking lot. It's now a big party every weekend night.I walk my dog past there several times daily, and I often see patrons packed close together, rarely if ever masked. The owners seem completely unconcerned with the facts on how COVID-19 is transmitted and prevented, and that's the message they convey to patrons and neighbors.It shouldn't be surprising they want to roll back these restrictions or financially profit from them, but somehow I had expected better of them. It's a shame.
Catherine Anne, Louisville, 40205
Bar owners' anger is misplaced The anger toward our good governor is most definitely misplaced.
The owners of Dundee Tavern and Back Door should look to Trump if they want to find the responsible party for their business losses.
Trump refused to recognize the existence of COVID until it had taken hold and became the huge killer that it is while wrecking our economy. His administration was to give small businesses loans to help them. Did the bar owners apply for them? Did they receive the loans? If not, they might try to find out who actually got those loans; although it was certainly not the small businesses.
Our governor has done everything he could to keep people safe and continues to be sued for it. His courage as a leader and sensitivity to the people of this state has been remarkable. He would never "target" bars. They are not the only ones hurting because of the lack of leadership from Washington. Hopefully cooler heads will prevail.
Johanna Fears, Louisville, 40205
Jews support the fight for Black lives To my African American brothers and sisters, I know your pain, your suffering, your hope for justice and equality.
You see, I am Jewish. Over 90% of my mother's side of the family perished in the Holocaust. We have our own George Floyds, Breonna Taylors and Jacob Blakes, millions of them.
Discrimination and hatred are part of my people's history and daily experience here and elsewhere. Even among your own, there are those who for years have promoted the hatred of Jews, i.e. Louis Farrakhan.
At these times of upheaval and uncertainty, I would like you to know that I and the majority of Jews in the United States and around the world are standing with you, as they have always done, in your struggle to achieve equality and justice. Black Lives Matter!
Avital Schurr, La Grange, Ky. 40031
The Houstons are Louisville gems Racism, Breonna Taylor's murder, protesters, fired police chief, looting, daily shootings, no sure way for schools opening, political lies from both parties and any other negative topics you can conjure up with the Louisville community can be found on a daily basis in The Courier Journal. But thank goodness to break the monotony of the aforementioned topics, there was a good, positive read on Wade and Alice Houston recently and their companies' operations. Their business acumen has been noticed for years with a variety of awards and citations.
However, there is another personal side of this couple who love our community so much. They are philanthropists by nature with their time and wealth with no end in sight for worthy causes that mean so much to them, and never looking for any headlines. They steadfastly remain humble in all they have accomplished. They are spiritually driven to be good parents to their three successful children and grandparents. This is easily noticeable to those who know them personally.
In social settings they are such a fun-loving couple who make you feel very much at ease around them with their humorous stories, not to mention the delicious food for your appetite. The drinks are good, too. Yes, they are two Louisville gems to read about in spite of the world turmoil.
Eugene Donan, Louisville, 40220
Nothing worse than a teenager with a gun I can think of nothing worse than a 17-year-old roving the streets with an AK-47. Guns and violence never solve anything. All it does is inflame and incite more violence and death. Where did this child get this weapon of mass destruction?
Obviously, his parents don't care about his safety or the safety of others he might come into contact with in a city where the racial tensions are extremely raw. Why would you let a 17-year-old travel to Kenosha alone with an AK-47? That's insane. (And illegal for him to posses one.) And now, Fox News and right-wing extremists are attempting to elevate this murderous teenager into some kind of hero. That's insane.
Our entire country seems to be imploding from within. COVID-19 spreading out of control, millions out of work, "off-the-charts" racial tension, ongoing protests, and now vigilante violence. Let's hope these violent, misguided, gun-toting vigilante types go home and stay there. I want to make America safe and sane again. That's why I'm voting for Biden-Harris in 2020.
Elizabeth Wallen, Springfield, Ky. 40069
Law and order must not apply to Trump It was a shock to the system to see part of the Republican National Convention held on the grounds of the White House — the People's House. Donald Trump and Republicans talk a lot about "Law and Order," but I guess they just mean for us, not them. Law experts say that Trump and Republicans violated the 1939 Hatch Act, and not for the first time.
The Hatch Act states: It is illegal for federal employees to use government property or resources to advocate for their political beliefs. True, the law does not apply to the president or vice president, but there were plenty of other Trump Administration folks in attendance and participating in the preparation and execution.
Does the law matter or not? Do we have one set of laws for us and another for Republicans? Just asking.
Jean Smith, Goshen, Ky. 40026
Improving access to health care is crucial Especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, lymphedema patients must have the medical supplies they need to safely manage their condition at home. The Lymphedema Treatment Act (S.518/H.R.1948) is a bipartisan bill that will improve insurance coverage for medically necessary, prescription compression supplies.
Without this central component of treatment, lymphedema patients are at significantly increased risk of infection and hospitalization. With more than 450 cosponsors, the Lymphedema Treatment Act is the most supported health care bill in Congress and should be passed into law this year.
Lillie Howard, Louisville, 40216
Dundee Tavern and The Back Door are suing Gov. Andy Beshear over COVID-19 emergency orders they describe as "contradictory, ludicrous, arbitrary, and discriminatory."
provided
$$$
