LMPD handcuffs tear gas use
Duvall, Tessa; Ladd, Sarah; Tobin, Ben
11 June 2020
Breonna Taylor's slaying, along with the recent high-profile deaths
of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, have sparked more than a week of protests in Louisville and across the U.S., some
marred by violence by protesters and police.
Peppered by bad press over the dousing of often nonviolent protesters with tear gas, Louisville police will no longer deploy the stinging chemical unless the chief approves it first.
Interim Chief Robert Schroeder announced the new policy Wednesday, saying officers won't be allowed to shoot tear gas without his or his designee's direct approval.
"I know several peaceful protesters got caught up in situations where tear gas had to be used, and I regret that those people had to experience that; had to go through the effects of tear gas," Schroeder said Wednesday.
"Our officers' intention is never to harm those who are doing the right thing, obeying the law, peacefully protesting, doing what we expect our citizens to do."
Schroeder also said the detective who applied for the no-knock search warrant that precipitated the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman, in her home is on administrative reassignment pending further investigation.
And, Mayor Greg Fischer announced a community survey seeking input for a new, permanent police chief, just over a week after the former chief, Steve Conrad, was fired.
A curfew, pepper balls and a fatal gunfire exchange Protesters took to Louisville's streets by the hundreds and thousands starting May 28, calling for justice in Taylor's death March 13. Police shot Taylor in her apartment after an officer was struck by a bullet fired by Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker.
An attorney for Walker said he thought intruders were breaking in. Walker was charged with attempted murder of an officer and assault, which have been dropped.
Taylor's slaying, along with the recent high-profile deaths of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, have sparked more than a week of protests in Louisville and across the U.S., some marred by violence by protesters and police.
In Louisville, protests prompted police to use tear gas and pepper balls to break up crowds, particularly after Fischer declared a 9 p.m. curfew. The decisions carried heavy consequences.
On June 1, police and National Guard troops were sent to break up a crowd at 26th and Broadway after curfew, resulting in an exchange of gunfire that killed David McAtee at his West End barbecue shack. State officials and police say video and forensic evidence indicate McAtee fired first, and he was fatally wounded by a guard member's rifle bullet.
Gov. Andy Beshear, who ordered the guard's activation, said sending guard members to Louisville was necessary, considering a shooting during the first night of protests left seven people injured.
Beshear also said that law enforcement "absolutely" needs to look at when and how tear gas is used.
"I think that, generally, law enforcement always wants to or should always want to go back and look at any incident, and say, 'Why did we do what we do? Could we have done it better?'" Beshear said. "I think this is a time where some real discussion has started and it would be a good discussion for everybody involved now."
Police have said they have been the target of frozen water bottles, jars filled with gasoline, urine or a mixture with vomit, leaf blowers filled with bleach or other chemicals, bricks and fireworks.
The department hasn't used tear gas "casually," Schroeder said, and always did so "as a last resort to clear crowds they were presenting a safety issue to the public."
Detective who got no-knock Taylor warrant reassigned Schroeder also announced Wednesday that he has placed Detective Joshua Jaynes on administrative reassignment until questions from Taylor's family, her attorneys, a U.S. postal inspector and others about "how and why the search warrant was approved" are answered.
Schroeder said the matter has been referred to the FBI, which has launched its own investigation into Taylor's death.
Jaynes wrote five affidavits seeking a judge's permission for no-knock searches, including at Taylor's South End apartment, as a part of a narcotics investigation in March.
Jefferson Circuit Judge Mary Shaw signed all five within 12 minutes.
According to court records, the warrants were for Taylor's apartment on Springfield Drive, a suspected drug house in the Russell neighborhood on Elliott Avenue, two vacant homes nearby on Elliott Avenue and a suspected stash house on West Muhammad Ali Boulevard.
While Taylor was named on the warrant for her apartment, two men — Jamarcus Glover and Adrian Walker — were named on all five warrants and were among the primary targets in the narcotics investigation.
Glover was arrested on Elliott Avenue that night for trafficking and firearm offenses. The case is pending.
The language on all five warrants is similar, describing the criminal history of the suspects and Jaynes' observations. All end by asking for a no-knock entry "due to the nature of how these drug traffickers operate."
Jaynes wrote that the subjects have a history of attempting to destroy evidence, using cameras to monitor police and fleeing law enforcement.
But experts and a defense lawyer for Taylor's family have found fault with the warrant applications, arguing that they were too vague and contained potentially inaccurate information.
Taylor's apartment was included in the search because Jaynes said Glover had been seen getting a package from Taylor's home in January and driving to a "known drug house."
Jaynes also wrote that he "verified through a U.S. postal inspector that Jamarcus Glover has been receiving packages" at Taylor's apartment.
But U.S. postal inspector Tony Gooden, of Louisville, told WDRB News in May that a different agency had asked in January to look into whether Taylor's home was receiving suspicious mail. The office had concluded that the apartment was not, according to Gooden.
More than a month after Taylor died, Jaynes again received a no-knock search warrant for the suspected drug house on Elliott Avenue, still targeting Glover and three other suspects.
Glover was arrested following that search for additional trafficking charges.
Fischer announces community survey for new city police chief More than a week after firing the head of the city's police department, Fischer announced a survey Wednesday to seek community input for a new permanent chief.
The city will be working with the Police Executive Research Forum, a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit leading the search for the new chief, to distribute the survey.
The survey, which can be found online at arcg.is/18fTnS and will be open for three weeks, asks respondents to answer three questions:
What are the 3 most important qualities or skills you would like to see in the next police chief for the Louisville Metro Police Department?
Share any suggestions you have for improving police services.
What would you like to see the next chief accomplish immediately? Over the next 2-3 years?
The survey also will be distributed to police officers.
Fischer also said the city and the nonprofit are working to set up phone lines for those who don't have internet access to take the survey.
Moreover, the Police Executive Research Forum will hold listening sessions with groups across Louisville over the next few months, before beginning a national search and creating a list of candidates. The Metro Council and various groups will review the candidate lists, conduct interviews and send final recommendations.
The entire process should take four to six months, according to Fischer.
Breonna Taylor's slaying, along with the recent high-profile deaths
of George Floyd and Ahmaud Arbery, have sparked more than a week of protests in Louisville and across the U.S., some
marred by violence by protesters and police.
"I don't believe the community of Louisville wants to defund the police. That's not our plan to do that either," said Mayor Greg Fischer during a press conference at Central Park on Wednesday.
$$$
