Booker: There's 'no root of racism we cannot pull up'
Watkins, Morgan
29 Aug 2020
"We stand here in the legacy of the dream. The dream that Dr. King lifted up."
Kentucky Rep. Charles Booker
Kentucky Rep. and former U.S. Senate candidate Charles Booker told a massive crowd in Washington, D.C., Friday that the dream Martin Luther King Jr. spoke about more than half a century ago is not done and promised there is "no root of racism we cannot pull up" if they all stand united.
"We stand here in the legacy of the dream. The dream that Dr. King lifted up," Booker said late Friday morning as part of the Get Your Knee Off Our Necks Commitment March on Washington.
Friday's event was held exactly 57 years after the 1963 March on Washington, during which King gave his revered "I Have A Dream" speech.
"We're here today because we know that dream is not done, because although they marched for us then, the cries we're hearing across the country right now — from Kenosha to Kentucky, from the hood where I'm from to the hollers in Appalachia to everywhere in between — those cries let us know we have more marching to do," he declared.
Today, America is once again in the midst of a widespread movement against racism as protesters throughout the country speak out against police brutality and other forms of discrimination against Black people. Thousands upon thousands of people attended Friday's new March on Washington, which was organized by the Rev. Al Sharpton and a civil rights organization called the National Action Network.
Booker was one of many people who spoke at the event, during which the organizers implemented various protocols meant to limit the spread of COVID-19. Other prominent speakers included Sharpton; Martin Luther King III, the son of Martin Luther King Jr. and Coretta Scott King; and Tamika Palmer, the mother of Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman who was shot and killed by Louisville police in March.
Palmer called for change, telling the crowd that "we are at a point where we can get that change, but we have to stand together, we have to vote."
Many who attended the march called for Congress to pass reforms concerning how law enforcement agencies and officers operate and to approve the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, a proposal named in honor of the late U.S. Rep. John Lewis that effectively would restore part of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 the U.S. Supreme Court previously struck down.
Booker told the attendees at Friday's march that they are built for this moment. "We are on the shoulders of giants, but we must step off of those shoulders and lead ourselves," he said. "We are the dream, but we must turn that dream into demands. Demands for real justice, demands for humanity, demands for accountability, demands for an end to poverty, demands for an end to racism."
America's ongoing protests against racism and police brutality began in late May. Booker attracted national notice at the time because he was competing in Kentucky's Democratic primary for Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's congressional seat and quickly joined protesters on the streets of his hometown of Louisville.
His participation in the protests drew support within and outside of Kentucky, which helped him mount a last-minute surge as he tried to defeat the primary's front-runner, Amy McGrath.
He came close to beating her but lost the primary in June by less than 3% of the vote. McGrath, whom Booker has since endorsed, will face off against McConnell in November.
Now, Booker is leading a new advocacy group he started, "Hood to the Holler," that's working on supporting causes he promoted during his Senate bid. "I am a personal witness that we are ready for this moment. We're built for the work we must do," he said in the nation's capital Friday. "And if we come together, all of us, if we stand united, if we march together, if we bend that arc together, there is nothing we can't do. There is no mountain we can't move, and there is no root of racism we cannot pull up."
As he wrapped up his brief speech, he took a moment to mention Taylor, the emergency room technician Louisville police shot and killed in March.
Protesters across the country have been demanding justice for Taylor, but her loss is especially personal to people like Booker who live in Louisville.
"Breonna, I'm representing you right now," Booker said right before he walked away from the microphones. "Thank you all."
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26.
Inside
Thousands join rally for racial justice in D.C. 12A
"We stand here in the legacy of the dream. The dream that Dr. King lifted up."
Kentucky Rep. Charles Booker
People prepare to march from the Lincoln Memorial to the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial on Friday. The new March on Washington was held on the 57th anniversary of King's "I Have A Dream" speech.
photos by jacquelyn Martin/AP
Tamika Palmer, mother of Breonna Taylor, speaks at the March on Washington on Friday. At left is Rep. Al Green, D-Texas, and at right is the Rev. Al Sharpton. Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency room technician, was killed by Louisville Metro Police officers executing a no-knock search warrant on March 13.
$$$
