'Louisville should be mourning today'
Kachmar, Kala
13 June 2020
"David did not live long.
But listen to me: David
did live strong."
The Rev Kevin Cosby
Of St. Stephen Baptist Church
The soft echo of sobs carried in St. Stephen Baptist Church on Friday, where David McAtee lay in a gold and black casket, dressed in a sharp, white blazer with a matching shirt and pocket square.
The popular 53-year-old owner of YaYa's BBQ shack in the Russell neighborhood died from a single bullet to the chestfired by a Kentucky National Guard member whose troop was working the Louisville police to clear out a crowd after curfew at 26th and Broadway on June 1.
He will be buried Saturday.
"These two days will be a great celebration for a great black patriot," the Rev. Kevin Cosby of St. Stephen said at McAtee's viewing Friday afternoon. "I pray, our Lord, that our community may be healed of violence, of racism, of police brutality and militarism."
Louisville police and Kentucky officials investigating the shooting say evidence and security video indicate McAtee fired at least two rounds from his 9 mm handgun that night after police shot pepper balls to disperse the crowd.
Two National Guard troops and two police officers fired at least 19 rounds in response, with a guard member firing the fatal bullet. The guard members' names have not been released.
An attorney for the family, as well as witnesses there the night McAtee died, insist that he would not have fired on police. Any reaction he had was to protect his niece, who was hit at least three times with pepper balls inside the barbecue shack, attorney Steve Romines said.
Against policy, police were not wearing body cameras during the shooting, which has sparked outrage from a community still reeling from the March 13 death of 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot at least eight times in her home by plainclothes officers executing a no-knock search warrant.
Gov. Andy Beshear mobilized the National Guard in the days before McAtee's death to monitor protests, some of which had turned violent, sparked by Taylor's death.
"(David) paid the ultimate price the other day by laying his life down for justice," Cosby said. "He was such a wonderful brother who never once asked what's in it for me, but what's in it for others."
At the front of the church, McAtee's casket was surrounded by large arrangements of white flowers.
"The whole community, the whole city of Louisville should be mourning today," said Brenda Brookins, a spokeswoman for the family.
Odessa Riley, his mother, was the first to approach her son. She stood over him, kissed her hand and touched his mouth, and then grabbed his hand.
Brookins, Riley's goddaughter, said David is the fifth child Riley's had to bury.
Friends and family — wearing masks — made their way to see his body. Some stood over him, sobbing, while others were silent.
Little boys and girls clung to their parents in the pews. Some family members cried out in agony.
"What matters most is not where you live, but how well you live. David did not live long. But listen to me: David did live strong," Cosby said. "In his few short years, he made a difference."
McAtee's family wants folks to remember him as a hardworking citizen who cared about his community. Brookins said he treated his business like his child – watching and helping it grow.
"He started, basically, as a street vendor and acquired a building," Brookins said.
"Every time I talked to him, he talked about a vision of moving to the next level," she said. "And it's just sad that he did not get to fulfill his dream. But he does have a legacy that will live on."
The unanswered questions about the circumstances that lead to McAtee's death are still plaguing the family, she said.
"I just hope that as the world (and) the United States watches, I hope that Louisville does the right thing by David," Brookins said.
$$$
