Law enforcement reform is necessary
26 July 2020
Breonna Taylor's tragic death is an open wound for her family and our city. I share the frustration at the pace of justice as we all await the attorney general's findings, and findings from independent investigations by the Department of Justice and FBI.
But while we wait for those outcomes, I am not waiting to pursue the cause of racial justice, particularly the need for public safety reform. We are acting by:
Signing Breonna's Law to ban no-knock warrants, and mandate use of body cameras for officers serving search warrants.
Installing new leadership at Louisville Metro Police, and conducting a national search for a permanent chief with major public involvement.
Hiring a firm to conduct a top-to-bottom review of LMPD.
Creating an independent civilian police review board with subpoena power.
Changing our system so that in the event of a police shooting where a person is killed or injured, we contact Kentucky State Police to investigate, rather than LMPD investigating themselves.
These are substantial changes. But they are not enough because Black Americans dying at the hands of law enforcement has been happening for centuries and to really address structural and systemic racism, you have to reform the structures and the systems.
We need changes in state law. State law KRS 67c essentially imposes a gag order on what I can say publicly about such investigations. Being unable to answer basic questions contributes to distrust of the process. This law must change. We also must change state law so our new Civilian Review Board has subpoena power.
And we must work with the FOP through collective bargaining to strike the right balance between protecting officers' right to due process and providing greater transparency and accountability.
LMPD employs about 1,100 police officers, sworn to serve and protect about 770,000 people. That's more than 700 people for every police officer. So it's clear: Public safety requires that police and the public work together.
There are serious, longstanding challenges in policing that must be addressed. But we must also acknowledge that because we've failed to make necessary investments to address poverty, mental health, domestic violence, substance use and other challenges, we too often ask police to address all of society's problems.
We must acknowledge that while we may have ended the legal mechanisms of racism-fueled segregation and slavery, Black Americans still face policies and practices that result in disenfranchisement: assaults on civil and voting rights, gentrification, overincarceration, and a lack of access to quality education, health care and employment.
My team has been working for almost a decade to bring change. But it's not enough. And, right now, our city and nation have an opportunity to do more. America has faced moments like this before, but lacked the courage, will or unity to make transformational change needed at the local, state and national level. We must do it now.
That's why my first act as the new president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors was to propose and pass a resolution in support of Congress creating a commission to study and develop proposals for reparations for Black Americans. We're also working on bipartisan recommendations to address critical issues like eliminating poverty and structural racism as well as building health equity. As conference president, I'll also call for a raise in the grossly inadequate federal minimum wage to a family-supporting wage.
It's time for all of us to take greater action. It's no longer enough to say you are not racist or to post supportive messages on social media or put a sign in your yard.
It's time to do more — to channel the spirit of one of our city's great civil rights heroes, Anne Braden, who said, "In every age, no matter how cruel the oppression carried on by those in power, there have been those who struggled for a different world. I believe this is the genius of humankind, the thing that makes us half divine: the fact that some human beings can envision a world that has never existed."
I know there are people in our community who are upset at me, for decisions I've made or decisions they wish I'd make. I understand that. What I ask of you now is to acknowledge that we face a choice, and it's not about Black vs. white or protesters vs. police.
It's about the past vs. the future. One we can't change, and one we can — if we work together.
There will always be disagreements, but the fundamental fact is, when you share a city, you share a future. We don't have to look hard for common ground. This city we love is our common ground.
America's eyes are on Louisville. Let's demonstrate what we already know: Louisville has the combination of civic pride, wisdom, courage and compassion to be that American city that takes itself from tragedy to transformation. Together.
Greg Fischer is the mayor of Louisville.
Your Turn
Greg Fischer
Guest columnist
Protesters prepared to march from Breonna's Circle in Jefferson Square Park on July 16 to mark the 50th day of protests following the death of Breonna Taylor.
$$$
