University presidents support protesters
Ladd, Sarah
05 June 2020
University presidents on Wednesday voiced support for protesters demanding justice for Breonna Taylor and called on their communities to address systemic racism.
At Jefferson Square Park, University of Louisville President Neeli Bendapudi said recognizing the pain and suffering in society is important.
"Higher education is always about, hopefully, transforming lives for the better," she said. "As leaders of higher education we want to say, 'We know it's our responsibility to educate the next generation so that they don't repeat the sins of the past and that we rectify ... and we move forward.'"
This comes as crowds have protested the death of Taylor, an unarmed black woman who was shot by Louisville police at night in her apartment in March, and George Floyd by police in Minneapolis, among others.
Protesters have filed the streets of Louisville since last Thursday night and in Lexington since Friday night.
Bendapudi was joined by Spalding University President Tori Murden McClure, who said "We need to be part of active change."
Leaders in education are proud, she added, of the young people "showing us the way."
After the protests are over, Bendapudi said, she hopes all the work is not forgotten. And higher education leaders must take on the responsibility of educating about these events.
Her message to young people out protesting was simple: "I see you, I hear you. I acknowledge what you're saying. And I know that we have failed you in terms of where we are today, but we are going to do better."
Earlier in the day, University of Kentucky President Eli Capilouto called for the campus community to address racism and work toward better inclusivity ahead of the fall semester.
In a video shared on YouTube, Capilouto said, "dialogue is not enough. We have to do what we can now to find the solution."
"Breonna Taylor was a student at the University of Kentucky in 2011," he said, going on to praise her work as a health care provider. "We mourn her loss. We grieve with her family."
"How do we ensure that her tragic death is not forgotten?" Capilouto asked. "How do we do better tomorrow than we have in the past?"
"I don't have answers or absolution for America's original sin," he said. "But we must acknowledge that the seeds of racism and hate, division and despair, continue to grow and thrive in our midst. Systemic and systematic racism deeply rooted in our society, has imprisoned and killed people of color in disproportionate numbers for too long."
As students and staff prepare for the fall semester, which begins Aug. 24, Capilouto urged that safety on campus goes beyond protecting the community from the coronavirus.
"Safety also must mean freedom from fear," he said. Part of that is for the university to "bridge divides" between law enforcement and communities of color, he said.
"We can't immediately eliminate seeds of hate, planted in gardens near and far," Capilouto said. "But in reinventing our campus, we have a chance to reinvent and reimagine our community. We must take it."
$$$
