Protesters meet with interim police chief
Aulbach, Lucas
16 June 2020
Demonstrators met with Louisville's interim police chief Monday morning following a street-blocking protest and tense moments with downtown drivers.
The demonstrators, many of whom have been sleeping in tents at Jefferson Square Park, called on interim Louisville Metro Police Chief Robert Schroeder to fire the three officers involved in the killing of Breonna Taylor, a Black woman who was shot by police in her apartment in March.
Schroeder didn't have the answer the crowd was looking for. He said if the officers were immediately fired, they could appeal and would get their jobs back — a common refrain from Mayor Greg Fischer that set off anger in the crowd that surrounded him. Schroeder left several minutes later after speaking with a number of protesters.
Louisville Metro Council President David James, a former officer, said he had called Schroeder to the park to speak with the crowd. James said he had been contacted by the demonstrators about a "disturbance" earlier Monday morning and reached out to the chief to listen to the protesters' concerns after he arrived.
"I think that was a positive step," James said. "I think (Schroeder) heard what people were saying and he heard their anger and he felt their anger, and I thought that was important."
Dozens of protesters had blocked Sixth and Jefferson streets earlier in the morning and forced downtown drivers to turn around and find different routes. Schroeder showed a video later in the afternoon of two cars blocked by protesters that drove through the crowd, each carrying a passenger with them on top of their vehicles as they continued down the street.
The incident is still under investigation, LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington said.
"We are fine with protesters using Jefferson Square Park for protest," Schroeder said. "But we need that space to stay safe for everyone."
The interim chief added that no evidence had been found to support an allegation that an LMPD car backed up and hit a protester earlier in the morning but video footage is still being reviewed.
One man in a silver Dodge Challenger at one point threatened to shoot protesters with an assault rifle and said he planned to return with more people in the evening, according to a Courier Journal freelance photojournalist at the scene. Schroeder said the department is "aware of that situation," and that more police would be at the park Monday night in response.
In a pair of Twitter posts, Fischer said Louisville officials understand the protesters' cause but asked them to let others in the area go about their business downtown. "We continue to support peaceful protests in the park, as long as protesters are not obstructing traffic or sidewalks, and are allowing people to get into their places of employment and government buildings," his post said.
Demonstrations at Jefferson Square Park began May 28 and have taken place every day since.
At an event Monday morning at Simmons College, Fischer said city officials have no issue with tents being set up at Jefferson Square Park and that there is no intent to build tension between police and protesters. "We support peaceful protests," he said.
On Monday evening, protesters took to the streets again, this time to block the entrance to Interstate 64 on Jefferson Street.
Courier Journal reporter Mandy McLaren and freelance photojournalist Marty Pearl contributed.
Protesters use their cars to block traffic downtown Monday morning, forcing drivers to find different routes.
$$$
