Mending a broken city
03 Sep 2020
It is Derby week in Louisville. Who would have dreamed that we would be watching — at a distance — the best 3-year-old horses in the world run at historic Churchill Downs on Labor Day weekend? And who could have imagined they would be running in a Louisville that we love, but that desperately needs truth-telling, reconciliation, justice and peace.
We will celebrate a great race this weekend, but we celebrate in an unprecedented time of anguish, hurt and unrest. We have lost a young woman named Breonna Taylor — and we need answers. Her tragic death has opened issues that have divided us for far too long. Now we have a crisis of violence in our community resulting in death, despair and deep mistrust in the justice system.
The hard truth is that Louisville is broken. Protests and unrest are evidence of a need for change. The issues causing turmoil are real and demand a difficult conversation about race. To mend our city, we must talk honestly and with respect for each other. And for any of us who may have refused to listen before, let's finally listen now — and learn.
At Impetus, we are faith, education, social service and business leaders who deeply love Louisville. The late David Jones Sr. brought us together. A great Louisville business leader, Mr. Jones never forgot where he came from — one of Louisville's most disadvantaged neighborhoods. He believed that systemic racism, persistent poverty, widening educational and income gaps could be overcome by listening, understanding and then taking action together for a better Louisville. Today, we are volunteers working for Louisville with no aim or self-interest except a better community for every citizen.
We co-chair a public safety and justice work group at Impetus that has spent the last months listening and learning from informed and passionate people — from community activists, prosecutors, protesters, police, faith leaders and elected officials. We want to understand more and propose solutions.
We know that we do not have all the answers. Still, our study of the systemic, root causes of violence and public safety has led us to a core belief: The path of racial equity and trust in the justice system is the only path to improving public safety for all.
To create this path, our community needs:
To establish trust and accountability through reforms in policing policy and practice. We need to develop an independent Civilian Review Board with full authority and accountability, including investigatory, disciplinary and subpoena power.
To ensure a change in police culture and practice. This goal demands a transparent, accountable search process to identify the country's best candidate as the new chief of the Louisville Metro Police Department.
A comprehensive demonstration response plan to ensure our right to protest and our right to keep our homes and businesses safe and secure.
A long-overdue look at the police bill of rights to ensure that our police officers have the tools and rights to keep us safe while eliminating policies and practices with adverse and unfair outcomes based on race.
A comprehensive review of "use-of-force" statutes, ordinances and practices, and an end to profiling and "stop-and-frisk."
To enact court reforms by changing pretrial approaches, such as bail reform and maximizing restorative justice for juvenile offenders.
To adopt comprehensive reentry programs that empower individuals leaving incarceration to live healthy, prosperous and productive lives when they return home.
We have already communicated to Mayor Greg Fischer that a widely understood, transparent and inclusive search for a new leader of LMPD is priority No. 1. On behalf of our city, the most important decision he will make is the hiring of a new chief of police.
We also communicated to Mayor Fischer and Metro Council President David James our belief that an independent civilian review board with real oversight tools and authority is vital to restoring our community's faith that our systems are just and fair.
This week, we celebrate the greatest horse race in the world. Let's also celebrate a race toward a better Louisville — reconciled, prosperous and just. That goal demands an open, honest dialogue between citizens demanding change and elected officials and government leaders responsible for making it happen.
Count us in as citizens demanding change.
Jennifer Hancock is president & CEO of Volunteers of America, Mid States, and Steve Poe is chief executive officer of Poe Companies. They serve as the volunteer co-chairs for the Impetus for a Better Louisville work group on public safety. Impetus for a Better Louisville brings together top decision-makers from business, higher education, faith communities, and the social services to share accountability for Louisville's future.
Your Turn
Jennifer Hancock and Steve Poe
Guest columnists
Protesters sit in the middle of Central Avenue in front of Churchill Downs on Aug. 25.
$$$
