Council passes amended Fischer no-confidence legislation
Ladd, Sarah
19 Sep 2020
The Louisville Metro Council has passed amended legislation to give Mayor Greg Fischer a list of ways to regain the city's trust.
The amended resolution passed 22 to 4 Thursday night after three hours of debate among Metro Council members. Instead of merely declaring no confidence in the mayor and asking him to resign, the amended version gives him a list of ways he can build back trust.
That list includes:
Ensuring the "complete investigative findings" into the killings of Breonna Taylor, David McAtee and subsequent civil unrest are shared publicly after they are concluded, with a review of events, decisions and policy review, along with "a detailed question and answer session by members of the Council and the media";
Make available any and all Metro Government staff for the Metro Council's investigation into Fischer's handling of the Taylor and McAtee cases and protests;
Provide a "public accounting" of all internal police investigations and ensure they are completed quickly;
Conduct future press briefings in person;
Complete the top-to-bottom review of LMPD by Dec. 31;
Change police policies to change the "culture of LMPD, promote community engagement and support officers who identify and report potential peer misconduct";
Finalize the River City FOP contract by Dec. 31;
Put in place recruiting practices to "Ensure the demographic makeup of LMPD represents the diversity of Louisville Metro" by Nov. 1, 2022;
Incentivize LMPD officers to live in Jefferson County;
Advance policies promoting home ownership without displacement and wealth-building in impoverished Census tracts — by presenting a plan to reduce or freeze property taxes in areas at risk of gentrification, to limit large-scale development and to create a stabilization voucher program;
Review all leadership appointments;
Publish Metro Government's employee demographics and proactively recruit and hire new staff to make it representative of the county by Dec. 31, 2021;
Prioritize "high impact areas" in code enforcement by proactively searching for and addressing violations, rather than depending on resident complaints;
Prioritize infrastructure spending in the county by need; and
Hire a director-level position within Louisville Forward to concentrate on economic development in disadvantaged areas and create an incentive program to spur investment.
Some of these steps are what the mayor's office already does or are close to existing processes, including evaluating all policies through an equity lens, making all staff available to the council and incentivizing LMPD officers to live in Jefferson County.
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah. Support strongism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
The Louisville Metro Council, instead of merely declaring no confidence in the mayor and asking him to resign, created the amended version to give him a list of ways he can build back trust.
$$$
