Kentucky's HBCUs join forces to shrink gaps
McLaren, Mandy
16 June 2020
Amid a national reckoning over racism, Kentucky's two historically black colleges and universities will lead efforts to repair centuries of racial injustices, including crippling educational and wealth gaps.
Those efforts — which include a push for increased financial, political and moral investment in Black-led institutions — will be largely focused on Louisville, home to the commonwealth's largest African American population.
Though protests in Louisville have focused on recent police violence against Black people, demonstrators' frustrations are decades-old, said the Rev. Kevin Cosby, president of Simmons College.
"The reason why Breonna Taylor was killed," Cosby said Monday, "was because Breonna Taylor and people who look like her are not a part of the future of Louisville. And this is how you treat people who are not a part of the future of our city."
Speaking at Simmons' downtown Louisville campus, Cosby was joined by Christopher Brown, president of Frankfort-based Kentucky State University. The two leaders announced several new initiatives to combat systemic racism, including:
A partnership between the two campuses to recruit and train more Black teachers for Kentucky's classrooms
A Simmons-led "Kerner Commission 2," which will seek to implement recommendations from the seminal 1968 report on racial inequality in the U.S;
A fund drive, with the goal of local philanthropy providing 300 annual scholarships to Simmons students
After weeks of unrest in Louisville's streets, Cosby, senior pastor of St. Stephen Church, said he has heard from some white leaders who now "want to return things back to normal."
But Cosby warned that a failure to make significant changes to the city's priorities and investments would be a further injustice to Louisville's Black residents, adding that Black people should drive the changes they see are needed.
"We are poor, but there are assets in the community," Cosby said. "And the best people who are in a position to fix a problem are the people who are closest to the problem. Black people, if given the resources, should be in the lead. We've got to quit imposing, from the outside, solutions that have not worked for 400 years."
Uplifting Louisville's Black community, Cosby said, will require an "infusion of money" from both local philanthropists and the city budget.
Mayor Greg Fischer, who was at the announcement, said he agreed.
"So the issue is now: Will philanthropy, will white America, will white Louisville, wake up ... and say, 'I may not have caused slavery, but I'm a beneficiary from a wealth standpoint of the impact of slavery'?" Fischer said. "And so, what are you going to do in this moment of truth?"
HBCUs to lead teacher recruitment, training Cosby and Brown on Monday signed a letter of intent to explore various areas of collaboration between Simmons College and Kentucky State University, Kentucky's two historically Black higher-education campuses.
The partnership follows a call for help from Gov. Andy Beshear, who last week asked the institutions to lead the commonwealth's recruitment and training for Black teachers.
More than one-third of the students in Jefferson County Public Schools, Kentucky's largest school district, are Black. But just 15% of the district's teachers are.
A broad body of research shows all students benefit from having teachers of diverse racial backgrounds. Black students, in particular, benefit when they have teachers who look like them, according to a study published in 2018 by the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The partnership between Simmons and Kentucky State will also allow students to transfer between the campuses, which could provide a boost in participants to a teacher pipeline program for JCPS
That program, established in 2019, gives Simmons students hands-on teaching experience in JCPS schools, financial support for licensure exams and guidance for pursuing a full-blown teaching certificate, The Courier Journal previously reported.
During the 2019-20 school year, 12 Simmons students participated in the program, according to JCPS.
'Kerner Commission 2' Separate from its partnership with Kentucky State, Simmons announced it would create a task force to pick up the unfinished work of a seminal civil rights-era report.
The 1968 Kerner Commission report, developed in the aftermath of violent race riots across the U.S., declared that white racism and systemic discrimination were to blame for the upheaval. But recommendations from the report, which was commissioned by the federal government, were never implemented.
"The basic conclusion of the Kerner Commission report was that our nation is moving toward two societies: one Black, one white. Separate and unequal," said Frank Smith, executive vice president for Simmons. "And I am here to tell you today, we have arrived."
Smith will help lead the "Kerner Commission 2," along with Nancy Seay, chairwoman of the sociology department at Simmons. The group will seek to educate the community about Black issues and identify the "unique attributes and strengths located inside Louisville's Black community," Seay said.
Simmons seeks donations for 300 annual scholarships Simmons will also call on Louisville's philanthropic community to help more Black students earn their college degrees.
Smith said many of Simmons' students work multiple jobs and still struggle to meet their financial responsibilities.
"With all the wealth in Louisville, we see it stacked up, there's no reason why any student should have to come to Simmons and not be able to afford a college education here," he said.
The college is hoping to receive $18 million in funding commitments — enough to cover 300 annual $15,000 scholarships for a four-year bachelor's degree.
Mandy McLaren: 502-582-4525; mmclaren@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @mandy_mclaren. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/mandym.
The Rev. Kevin Cosby, president of Simmons College, speaks during a news conference on Monday. Cosby pushed for more investment in HBCUs and signed an agreement with Christopher Brown, president of Kentucky State University, that would allow for the two schools to work more closely, especially in the recruitment of more Black teachers.
photos by Michael Clevenger/Courier Journal
Brown, president of Kentucky State University, signed a letter of intent to explore ways to collaborate with Simmons College.
$$$
