Louisville police say video shows McAtee shooting at officers
Kachmar, Kala
03 June 2020
Louisville Metro Police officials Tuesday released video footage that they say shows popular barbecue chef David McAtee firing a gun before officers shot and killed him early Monday morning.
But interim Louisville Metro Police Chief Robert Schroeder acknowledged the video footage of several security cameras "does not answer every question" about the sequence of events that cost McAtee his life.
And one of McAtee's family members said officials appeared to be offering excuses for his slaying, insisting that McAtee "did not try to shoot at the police."
"I think it shows them trying to justify why they were wrong," said his nephew, Marvin McAtee.
State officials said it appears National Guard troops and LMPD officers collectively fired about 18 shots during the shooting. The weapons involved have been inventoried and are being tested as well.
McAtee, whom his mother, friends and neighbors called a West End "community pillar," was fatally shot about 12:15 a.m. Monday when LMPD officers and Kentucky National Guard troops were sent to break up a "large crowd" (as described by police) at Dino's Food Mart on West Broadway.
Two of the four videos police released Monday and Tuesday were two street cameras operated by LMPD's Real Time Crime Center: one from inside McAtee's barbecue business across 26th Street; and an outside view from an adjoining business.
Officials also released a recording of the police radio transmission during the incident.
"We are providing this information because we have made a pledge to this community to be transparent," Schroeder said during Tuesday's press conference.
The two officers involved in the incident who police say shot their weapons, Katie Crews and Austin Allen, were either not wearing body cameras or did not have them activated. Officials have not said whether any other officers were wearing cameras.
The street cameras provide aerial views of Dino's Food Mart from the southeast and northeast corners that night. However, none of the videos have sound, and they don't sync to an audio recording of that night, an LMPD spokeswoman said.
LMPD Maj. Paul Humphrey said it "appears" — based on the video alone — that an armed McAtee fires at officers first. They then take cover and return fire.
However, the video footage does not clearly show McAtee firing at officers.
Police and Kentucky National Guard troops were dispatched to Dino's to disperse a crowd Monday night after responding to protesters, said Humphrey, commander of LMPD's Training Division.
Across from Dino's on 26th Street, McAtee, 53, operated his barbecue stand. His business's surveillance video shows him cooking meat and socializing with friends on the property seconds before he was killed.
"We had dealt with large, unruly crowds for several hours throughout the night prior to this incident. And in the downtown central area, we had pretty much had that under control, and the information we had was, this was the last large crowd that we had a gathering," Humphrey said.
The videos show McAtee raising his arm past his doorway, but his hand is blocked from camera view. After he's hit by one bullet to the chest, he stumbles back inside, drops a gun and falls to the ground.
Police also said Tuesday they recovered two firearms from the business but did not provide details on whether they were fired.
Video and audio posted on Facebook from a witness who was parked feet away from the shootout indicate a single fire was shot first. About three seconds pass and more gunfire is exchanged.
Before the gunfire, a Louisville police officer can be seen firing pepper balls while walking toward the small group under McAtee's tent on the property, forcing them inside the shack.
The officer continues to shoot pepper balls into the open door, just a few feet away.
Schroeder and Public Safety Chief Amy Hess have said the troops and officers were using pepper balls to "clear" the Dino's parking lot. Hess said Tuesday police did not "confront the people directly."
A separate Facebook video captures sound from about half an hour before police arrive until about 30 minutes after the shooting. In it, police and guardsmen in the Dino's parking lot can be heard and seen asking people to leave.
The video released Tuesday by police shows officers arrived shortly after midnight:
There are about 25 cars parked in Dino's parking lot.
A few cars are parked on a 26th Street sidewalk adjacent to Dino's.
About 20 people can be seen walking through the parking lot, coming in and out of the store.
There is no indication of protesting or demonstrations outside Dino's.
Several bystanders on foot and in vehicles could be seen leaving the parking lot as soon as the military and police vehicles pull up.
Mayor Greg Fischer said he visited with McAtee's mother, Odessa Riley, at her home Tuesday morning "so I could show her the videos before we release them to the public."
"This is a difficult piece of the story to process," he said. "But I believe in transparency, and I've heard the community demands that we share information as quickly as we're able to do in this and all officer-involved shootings going back many years now."
On Monday, Fischer said the lack of body camera footage was an "unacceptable" institutional failure.
It also disappointed Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear, who had asked Monday morning for LMPD to quickly release what he believed was a "significant" amount of video evidence capturing the shooting.
On Monday, Beshear ordered Kentucky State Police to investigate the shooting, with the FBI Louisville Field Office, U.S. Attorney Russell Coleman's office and state Attorney General Daniel Cameron's office working alongside them.
Beshear and J. Michael Brown, the state's Executive Cabinet secretary, also provided new details Tuesday about the investigation into the shooting.
Brown said it appears guard members and LMPD officers collectively fired about 18 shots during the shooting. The weapons involved have been inventoried and are being tested as well.
"Our goal is to get all of the facts, get them quickly and be able to present a — as much as possible — clear determination of what happened," he said.
KSP obtained search warrants that yielded camera footage that LMPD released Tuesday, Brown said, and he indicated those videos are being closely examined.
"That review will continue in great detail, frame by frame," he said.
At the state level, Beshear stressed that more evidence still has to be gathered.
"The Kentucky State Police isn't going to make a claim about what the video shows until they've been able to collect all of the evidence and put it all together," he said.
Atlanta Falcons lineman Jamon Brown, center, leads volunteers during a community cleanup through downtown Louisville on Tuesday. The group was showing its support of the right to protest while advocating that it remains peaceful following the police shootings of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee.
Security camera footage shows a police officer along the fence approaching David McAtee's barbecue shack while firing pepper balls.
Security camera footage inside the barbecue stand shows McAtee in the red shirt.
provided by lmpd
Former U of L offensive lineman and current Atlanta Falcons offensive guard Jamon Brown, center, leads a group of volunteers during a community cleanup Tuesday.
$$$
