Retired officers criticize leaders
Kachmar, Kala
17 June 2020
A retired Louisville Metro Police officer led a rally Tuesday to express frustration with city and police officials for "inadequate" leadership amid ongoing protests.
More than 100 off-duty and retired officers stood behind George Rodman, a 2017 retiree and father of a fallen officer, at Central Park in Old Louisville.
"(Officers) are mentally and physically exhausted," Rodman said. "Unappreciated by the mayor and elected officials. Bewildered, frustrated, hesitant, abandoned, and most of all, judged for the uniform they wear."
LMPD officers are being abused by protesters and their families threatened on a daily basis, Rodman said. They're hit with glass bottles filled with urine or gas, feces, bricks and homemade explosives. Some are verbally berated, physically assaulted and shot at, he said.
"Why are crimes being committed daily in the name of protests that would not be tolerated otherwise?" Rodman asked at the rally.
Louisville erupted in protest on May 28 over the shooting of 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman killed by police gunfire as officers executed a no-knock search warrant at her apartment March 13.
On June 1, West End barbecue operator David McAtee was fatally shot in the doorway to his business by the Kentucky National Guard, which, along with LMPD, was called to clear a nearby parking lot busy with pedestrians and cars after the 9 p.m. curfew in place as a result of protests.
Mayor Greg Fischer has given the police department orders to "stand down" on several occasions during the protests, Rodman said, adding that downtown Louisville looks like a war zone as a result.
"Officers told me many stories of great dialogue with peaceful protesters (they've had) to try to reach common ground and better understand each other," Rodman said.
A police memorial for fallen LMPD officers was vandalized early Sunday, Rodman said while choking up. His son, Nick Rodman, was an LMPD officer killed in the line of duty after a fleeing suspect crashed into his patrol car in 2017. He was 30.
"My son's name's on that wall," he said.
As protests continue across the country, Fischer said during a press conference Tuesday that there's a nationwide debate about when police should use force during protests.
"The goal is to always deescalate if possible," Fischer said, adding there have been more than 100 protest arrests so far.
"When we're in situations that are extremely volatile, and arrests could cause more problems than they can solve, that's when judgment comes in," Fischer said.
When asked if he makes the decisions when it comes to deciding to stand down or not, Fischer said interim LMPD Chief Rob Schroeder makes those calls. Fischer said he is "sometimes around" when those decisions are made.
Fischer said he believes the majority of the police department trusts him.
Rodman said inadequate pay and a toxic environment are just a few frustrations officers have with LMPD and city leadership. Officers have become "scapegoats" for the poor decisions leaders have made, as well as "scandal after scandal" associated with the department.
LMPD officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Kala Kachmar is an investigative reporter. Reach her at 502-582-4469; kkachmar@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/subscribe.
George Rodman, the father of fallen officer Nick Rodman, becomes emotional during the sentencing of Wathaniel Woods, who was charged with his murder, in 2018. George Rodman led Tuesday's rally.
$$$
