New signs mark out 'Breewayy'
Ladd, Sarah
15 Sep 2020
The streets around Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville have been "Breewayy" in the hearts of protesters for months.
Now, it's official.
Seventeen signs, hung Monday on light poles around the block, honor not only Breonna Taylor but the faces of the people who've occupied the park and marched around Louisville for the last 110 days. They show smiling children, mothers and protesters. And they include historical quotes from the likes of Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X.
The goal is to have a space for healing, said Nicole Hayden, the founder and president of Friends of Nicole 50/50 Mentoring Collaborative. Her organization, along with an organization called 1+1=U, raised more than $5,000 to fund the signs and cement the legacy of the protests in Louisville.
Downtown Louisville Partnership, which the mayor's office said is responsible for hanging any banners in the Central Business District, confirmed Metro Government invested no dollars into the project.
"People have been ... occupying that space for over 100 days," Hayden said. "And we wanted to show a dedication to the people that have been down there fighting for justice for Breonna Taylor."
The organizations originally wanted to use funds to paint "Black Lives Matter" across the street at Sixth and Jefferson, similar to murals in Washington, D.C., Indianapolis and other cities, but the request to the city was denied, Hayden said.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was fatally shot by Louisville police in March. Hayden said it's important the space is remembered for the good that's happened there.
"We want them to see that this was once a beautiful space for everybody," she said. "Not only Black people, not only protesters came down here. We had churches, we had organizations, we had children, we had moms, we had a song fest, we had gospel fests, people got baptized down here. We don't ever want people to forget that."
She suspects people will have to leave the park when Attorney General Daniel Cameron announces whether or not the officers involved in Taylor's death will be criminally charged. And, "even if we don't get the verdict that we want," she said, the signs remind people that "we will overcome and we shall continue pushing and fighting for justice."
"These banners will show that we were here," she said. " And we don't want people to forget."
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah.
Banners honoring Breonna Taylor and people who've marched around Louisville for the last 110 days were installed along W. Jefferson Street between 5th and 6th Streets in downtown Louisville on Monday.
Jeff Faughender/Courier Journal
$$$
