Curfew ends after 5 nights in Louisville, Fischer says
Aulbach, Lucas
29 Sep 2020
The 9 p.m. curfew that had been in place in Louisville for nearly a week has expired, the mayor's office announced Monday morning.
Barricades downtown that prevent cars from accessing a more than 25-block perimeter will remain in place, a statement from Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said, but "will be assessed on a daily basis."
"The curfew served its purpose of helping ensure that most people were home safe by 9 p.m., because our past experience had shown that most violence and destruction occurs after dark," Fischer said. "We sadly saw some violence, including the shooting of two police officers, one of whom remains hospitalized, dealing with complications of his injuries. But we believe the curfew helped, by ensuring fewer people were out late in the day."
The curfew and traffic barricades were put in place last week before the announcement that just one of the three officers at the center of the Breonna Taylor shooting case would face charges. The countywide curfew took effect at 9 p.m. nightly before expiring the following day at 6:30 a.m.
The curfew did not apply to those taking part in essential travel, such as driving to or from work or seeking medical attention, and did not apply to houses of worship. Some protesters had taken shelter at First Unitarian Church each night since Thursday to avoid risking arrest over curfew violations.
Dozens of protesters were taken into custody over the course of the five nights the curfew was in effect. At least 72 people arrested amid the protests between Wednesday and Saturday were charged with curfew violation, according to records provided by the Louisville Metro Police Department.
Fischer put the curfew in place through an executive order announced Wednesday afternoon, hours before Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron revealed the charges against former LMPD Detective Brett Hankison. The mayor said Saturday city officials believed it had contributed "to helping make us safer at this point," and that he planned to reevaluate it at the end of the weekend.
Sunday night was the most calm since Cameron's announcement, with no arrests related to protests or the curfew reported by police.
The traffic barricades downtown were put up early Tuesday before sunrise in anticipation of Cameron's press conference. LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said at that time that he hoped the move would be viewed as an overreaction in coming weeks but that it was "necessary to help protect the public."
People in Louisville can still access downtown by walking past the concrete barricades, but they prevent cars and other vehicles from accessing the area. Several city buildings are inside the perimeter along with Jefferson Square Park, the main locations where protests over Taylor's death have been taking place for more than 120 days.
"We appreciate that the vast majority of protesters over the past several days have been peaceful," Fischer said in his Monday morning statement.
$$$
