Wake up, white America
02 June 2020
At the beginning of Richard Wright's 1940 novel "Native Son," there is an alarm clock that sounds to literally wake up the black protagonist and his family in their one-room apartment.
Wright also intended for the alarm to sound as a metaphorical wake up call to America and its often slumbering approach to race relations.
What frustrates me as a white person, specifically with my fellow white Americans, is that many of us still can't seem to hear this alarm. No matter the redlining or mass incarceration, unequal services or discriminatory systems, too many white folks remain asleep to the atrocities endured by black folks in our country.
The alarm has been ringing for decades upon decades and yet white America, basking in ignorance, naiveté and immense privilege, simply won't wake up.
How long must the alarm ring, and how deafening must the ringing be, for us, white America, to finally wake up?
Our black brothers and sisters deserve better. Future generations of Americans deserve better. We, white America, must wake up and get to work.
Emory Williamson,
Louisville, 40202
The good, the bad and the ugly This week, America has witnessed a good thing. The two astronauts launched to the Space Station. It was showing the best of our country.
This week, America witnessed a bad thing. The death toll from the coronavirus hit the 103,000 mark with more lives to be lost in the weeks to come.
Sadly this week, America endures something ugly. We have peaceful protests turning violent. Only time will bring justice and hopefully racial and economic equality to those whose anger and frustration has boiled over.
We talk of a new normal in our lives much of which will become a permanent part of our country. Let us hope and work for a new change for the better in our values and the fabric of America.
We have much to do and much to positively gain as we move forward. If we fail in this endeavor, we have much to lose.
The heart and soul of our nation depends on the outcome.
Ed Handley,
Louisville, 40241
Hanging of Beshear effigy is 'absurd' and awful What a truly absurd message from the Kentucky Three Percenters!
At some of their violent gatherings like anti-abortion protests, they aggressively profess to be pro-life.
But they have no trouble whatsoever using the most symbolic, violence-laden death threat of all by hanging an effigy of the governor in front of his family, his home, the entire citizenry of Kentucky and, indeed, the world.
If this is their idea of PRO-life behavior, God help us all when they act out their murderous ideas and beliefs about ANTI-life, all under the cowardly claim of constitutional "rights."
Pat Chervenak,
Louisville, 40222
Life supersedes liberty "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." Declaration of Independence.
On Monday, one of the writers in the paper states, "I believe in liberty and our right to pursue happiness." He laments Kentucky officials (read Gov. Beshear) for enacting practices that address that first unalienable right stated in the Declaration — life. I see Gov. Beshear as protecting that life first, just as it is listed first in the Declaration.
It is time for the self-centered to learn the real meaning of those words and not just think they know. They are not even close. Self-centeredness is not the American way.
Scott Miller,
Maysville, Ky., 41056
Officers hold batons and fire paintball guns early Friday morning at protesters decrying the deaths of Louisville's Breonna Taylor and Minneapolis' George Floyd at the hands of police.
$$$
