Schroeder: Mayor asked if footage was doctored
Ladd, Sarah
29 Sep 2020
Mayor Greg Fischer once questioned whether his own police department would doctor video footage, interim police Chief Robert Schroeder said Monday.
It happened in mid-September, Schroeder testified before a Metro Council committee, when the department released video footage of people kicking a car on Fourth Street and rumors circulated that the footage was doctored.
"In a meeting, Mayor Fischer did ask me if we had doctored that video," he said. "Which, I told him, 'Of course not.' And he replied to me that he was having difficulty trusting the police at that point."
Schroeder made the comment to the Government Oversight and Audit Committee during a hearing he tried to fight. Last week he asked asking the Kentucky Court of Appeals to review the lower court's ruling requiring him to testify before the committee. But in a Monday ruling a judge ruled the request was denied.
Schroeder also said city officials discussed whether police should enter a church as it offered sanctuary to protesters after curfew Saturday in the wake of the Breonna Taylor decision.
"I do know that was a suggestion," Schroeder testified before a Metro Council committee. "That was brought up by some of the folks in the field."
On Thursday and other subsequent nights, protesters migrated to First Unitarian Church as curfew approached to escape arrests after 9 p.m. On Thursday, a rumor spread among the protesters that police planned to storm the church. A police spokesperson later denied that.
Metro Council President David James, a former police officer, asked Schroeder on Monday whether LMPD or the U.S. Department of Homeland Security contacted "the church about trying to execute a search warrant there in order to get to some individuals inside the church." A spokesperson said police believed an arson suspect may have gone to the church.
Schroeder told the council's Government Oversight and Audit Committee that he, public safety chief Amy Hess, the county attorney and other staff did discuss entering the church. But the officials "determined that was not an appropriate course of action," he said. "And it was not done."
In the 4-hour long meeting, Schroeder said the ongoing protests, which began May 28, have taken their toll on the department, whose officers he characterized as "the best the community has to offer."
He also told Metro Council to "consider your own role — the role this council has played in leaving our officers feeling unsupported and alone."
His time as interim chief has left him working with 10 minutes of sleep over 48 hours at times, he said. He's had to postpone his doctoral studies and his wife worries, he added.
Other highlights from Schroeder's testimony:
He said he's felt micromanaged by Fischer's administration at times, though "that has been an improving process."
Council President David James once halted police plans to remove tents from Jefferson Square, Schroeder said, when he called and "told me that if we took those tents or tried to take those tents out of the park, that we would have to arrest him."
Schroeder said he's given his phone number to protest leaders in the interest of peace and deescalation.
Schroeder, who has served as interim police chief of the department since June 1, has announced he will retire Oct. 1.
That could create roadblocks for future subpoenas since the committee's power to compel testimony applies to current city employees.
Schroeder fought giving testimony in open session because he is named personally in a pending federal lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky and NAACP Legal Defense Fund.
Hess, who was subpoenaed at the same time as Schroeder, appeared before the committee two weeks ago and acknowledged that she "made mistakes" in coordinating the city's response.
Darcy Costello contributed to this report.
$$$
