The diary of a young Black man
Brown, Quintez
23 Aug 2020
Courier Journal intern Quintez Brown has spent the summer telling the stories of people who live in his neighborhood – Louisville's predominantly Black West End. He's been talking to residents, amplifying their voices and sparking conversations about what this community needs to prosper. Brown, a 19-year-old who has been an organizer and leader in the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests, spent a week keeping a journal of his thoughts and experiences in his native neighborhood. Here's his story.
Sunday, Aug. 9 Since Michael Brown was shot and killed, I've been on a quest Six years ago, a police officer in Ferguson, Missouri, shot and killed 18-year-old Michael Brown. I was 13 and had no idea his death would change my life forever.
Brown grew up in St. Louis, Missouri, and like my hometown Louisville, Kentucky, St. Louis has an abominable history of racial redlining and urban renewal. Ferguson, a suburb of St. Louis, used to be exclusively white, similar to west Louisville's Shawnee and Parkland neighborhoods where I grew up. But due to the "white flight" phenomenon – where white families moved out of the cities to the suburbs around the 1950s – Shawnee and Parkland became predominantly poor and middle-class Black neighborhoods along with Ferguson as its white residents fled to newer suburbs.
Brown and I grew up in neighborhoods shaped by a long history of racist policy decisions and institutional designs. We both bore witness to the same outcomes: underfunded schools, neglected infrastructure, mass incarceration and over-policing to name a few. But his life experiences ended on the afternoon of Aug. 9, 2014, when officer Darren Wilson shot him six times after a physical confrontation.
Now I'm here, six years later, 149 days after the death of Breonna Taylor – an unarmed Black woman shot to death by Louisville police in her own home – attempting the challenging task of conveying the experiences of the young Black male in the city's West End.
It feels impossible because ever since Mike Brown was executed, I've been on a quest to dispel racial myths and critique the structure of America's racial project. And on this journey, I've seen more and more Black lives shattered by America's social contract, and yet many of you continue to believe in it, despite the grief, the anger and the pain you've witnessed from this country's most vulnerable. It is not my responsibility to help you understand why, because I, myself, must figure out how to live free in my Black body while I still have it.
Monday, Aug. 10 Gun violence. It seems to be a reality of which we cannot escape It's been 150 days since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor. But it's only been three days since local rapper Jonah Ware was found dead after a shooting in West Louisville's Chickasaw neighborhood.
Jonah was 19 years old. My age.
My brother broke the news to me because we grew up watching Jonah's rise as a musician. And many don't know how powerful it is to see someone from our part of town become successful and break the many generational curses that surround them. But many also don't know the feeling of powerlessness to see that person torn down by the same forces from which we all try to break away.
Gun violence. It seems to be a reality of which we cannot escape. They say bullets don't have a name, meaning that we are all directly or indirectly impacted by this deadly condition. But the trauma of seeing young Black lives taken away is only worsened when it is paired with racist narratives of violent Black criminality.
Jonah's sister, in an interview with WAVE 3 News, said, "Y'all mad at officers when they kill us, but we killing each other."
I can't imagine how she must feel.
I know she'll keep her brother's name alive, but for many, Jonah is another statistic. We give significant attention to the victims of police brutality. Millions honor their lives and say their names, but this is rare for victims of everyday gun violence. For many, Jonah was disposable. He could've been anyone doing anything, but since he was a young Black man, he'll become another body that fuels the narrative of "Black on Black crime."
While Black people are least likely to own guns and are highly supportive of gun control legislation, we are still the ones to blame for the violence afflicting our communities. We're blamed when militarized police forces brutalize us. We're blamed when we're killed by those police forces. We're blamed for our environment. We're blamed for our schools. And too many of us accept this.
Jonah should be alive because his life mattered. Too many of us are stuck in spaces of civic vulnerability where individual choices and actions have deadly consequences, and we can't escape without thinking about the roots of our environment.
Tuesday, Aug. 11 I think about the people who want to fight for a better world but must fight for survival It's been 151 days since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor.
Members of Until Freedom, a New York-based social justice organization, recently decided to take residency in Louisville to continue organizing demonstrations and events until there's been just accountability for Taylor's death.
Until Freedom's presence in Louisville has been controversial. Some see them as outsiders with no connections with the community, merely chasing attention, while others see them as powerful allies due to their national platform and resources.
Many, including myself, are new to consistent front-line organizing and direct activism. As the investigation of Taylor's death drags on, it is encouraging to see that this case is still getting national attention and assistance. Many of the local organizers in Louisville have participated in liberation activism for decades and have not received the respect or recognition they deserve for what they've done.
Activism is lonely and alienating. Political repression is real. Doing the right thing and standing up for what you believe can be daunting. Seeing protest and activism become trendy is painful considering the lack of support freedom fighters receive.
I think about all the people in my community who have a desire to fight for a better world but are sidetracked by the fight for survival. There's so much potential for meaningful change in my community, but people would rather debate if my peers deserve a living wage and a roof above their head.
I'm thankful that Until Freedom is fighting for our city. I hope they can work together with local organizers and support them in their longstanding struggle. As the city continues to antagonize and repress protesters, hope is needed more than ever.
Wednesday, Aug. 12 I've started noticing the 'unhoused' people in west Louisville more It's been 152 days since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor.
I no longer describe people with insecure housing situations as "homeless." Instead, I use "unhoused" to avoid the negative connotation and to imply the moral assumption that people should have a right to housing.
I've started to notice the unhoused people in west Louisville more. I feel like they were always there but rendered socially invisible. We're socialized to deny their existence unless we need to feed them for a resumé.
It was important for me not to view homelessness as a public nuisance, but a moral failure on behalf of society. We're so quick to assume how an individual's actions led them to a predicament, but many never interrogate the institutional arrangements and policy decisions that allow for conditions like homelessness to exist.
I always imagine how different an unhoused person's life would turn out if we lived in a society that prioritized health care, housing and education over police, prisons and punishment.
Thursday, Aug. 13 I fantasized about being a cop. Now, I want to abolish the police Today marks five months since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor.
I don't like seeing the police in my neighborhood. I've never heard anyone say that makes them feel safer. For me, it always seemed to correlate with more stress, more danger and more insecurity. And that held true for older family members and also my younger peers. Of course, this is a learned bias, and I remember a time where I fantasized about being a cop.
Now, I want to abolish the police.
Next week, I must sit on a panel with the Fraternal Order of Police president and Metro Council President David James, a former police officer. There'll be other panelists from different areas, but the conversation will be about bridging the divide with police. We'll talk about policing, trust and "moving forward." But for me, moving forwards means a world without police.
The historic relationship with law enforcement and my community goes beyond my time. I know many will treat my abolitionist perspective as youthful nonsense. The West End without police? People refuse to imagine it. All my life I've heard about lawless murderers and soulless criminals that populate my community. I'm well aware of the murder rate and criminal activity. My mom fears for my safety at night. So why would I consider an end to policing?
I'd say a better question is why do we cling so hard to the police? As they've become more well-funded, professional and militarized, we've continued with the same issues. Maybe novelist James Baldwin is correct in his statement that the police are simply the hired enemies of this population. And that they are present to keep the Negro in his place and to protect white business interests, with no other function.
Friday, Aug. 14 I think about escape a lot living in west Louisville It's been 154 days since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor.
There's a 2014 Courier Journal headline that reads, "Nearly half of Louisville lives in 'extreme segregation.'" This can be added to the list of things that raises the question: "Why don't they teach us this in school?"
We currently live in one of the most segregated cities in the country, and even amid the Breonna Taylor protests, the impact of this segregation is not always raised in conversation.
I think about narratives around "unity" and coming together as a city, and how these narratives don't consider how different the perspective of Louisville is from someone in my neighborhood compared to someone who grew up in the city's east end. People in west Louisville don't even experience Derby or downtown the same as other Louisvillians. The horse race used to fascinate me, but I knew nothing about Derby culture.
Louisville might have a lot to offer, but generations of racial exclusion and banishment can easily make its residents feel like they don't belong.
In the conversation around gun violence, the reaction to a senseless shooting usually sounds like this:
"The city needs help."
"What's wrong with Louisville?"
"The city is falling apart."
But this reality is not specific to just Louisville. Big metropolitan cities across the country contain a Black population where its residents are segregated in a low-income part of town full of police, liquor stores, broken sidewalks and broken dreams. While on the other side of town there is a completely different story and a completely different world.
I think about escaping my life in west Louisville. I've realized "getting out of the hood" is another way of chasing your own liberation and freedom. I don't know if I'll find my freedom on the other side of the Ninth Street divide, but I do hope we all can find it somewhere because many of us are living in a trap.
Saturday, Aug. 15 Despair lingers, but I find hope in those who continue this fight for freedom It's been 155 days since the Louisville Metro Police Department killed Breonna Taylor.
It's been a very long, hard summer. My level of disappointment worries me. Despair lingers, but I find hope in those who continue this fight for freedom.
I think a lot about the impact of my summer internship with The Courier Journal. I never considered myself a journalist, but the power of that freedom of the press guaranteed by the First Amendment goes without question. How many hearts and minds have I touched and inspired to fight for a better world? How vulnerable have I been?
I think about the messages I get from readers, mostly white. Some, to my enjoyment, call me a race-baiting reverse racist who hates the world. Others have applauded me for my courage and young wisdom. But I can't help to be saddened by the fact that no matter how many of my words they read and digest, they'll never truly understand how I experience the world or my community.
The hopelessness, trauma and despair that comes with existing as a Black person in this country may indefinitely be trivial for the white reader. Some find hope in my words, but I find a troubling reality that I must, once again, figure out how to exist within.
As a 19-year-old Black male born and raised in Louisville's West End, I am extremely grateful for the platform I've been given. But I desire not to be the exception. How many stories in the West End did I miss during my time at The Courier Journal? How many families in my community continue to scream at the void as systemic forces force them to desperately cling to their last remnants of hope?
I've been able to give readers a glimpse of the beauty of my community and my existence, but to be fully embraced by the potential we possess, then my community must get free. And everyone, from The Courier Journal to its readers, must forever commit to the Black liberation struggle to help make freedom possible for us all.
Quintez Brown is a summer intern at The Courier Journal. He has been involved with the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests as an organizer and leader and is committed to racial justice and activism. He can be reached at 502-650-3190 or qbrown@courierjournal.com.
Quintez Brown instructs a group during a Birthday for Breonna event at Cardinal Stadium in June.
Marty Pearl/Special to Courier Journal
Quintez Brown grew up in the West End of Louisville.
$$$
