Dems slam GOP's call to 'restore order' in city
Sonka, Joe
04 Sep 2020
"Instead of a calling in the National Guard, why don't you instead talk to the people and listen to their concerns and then respond accordingly?"
State Rep. Attica Scott
Democratic state legislators from Louisville pushed back against Senate Republican leadership's call this week for the governor to "restore order" in the city, saying it was part of a politically calculated "law-and-order" strategy.
They said it did not address the root causes of mass protests for racial justice.
"The (GOP) legislative leaders had a press conference and offered no legislative solutions to help Louisville or to end systemic racism," said Sen. Morgan McGarvey, D-Louisville, the leader of the Senate minority caucus. "It appeared to me to be some type of coordinated political attack during an election year."
Senate Republican leadership held the press conference Tuesday afternoon to criticize what they called the failed leadership of Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer amid a record murder rate, increased carjackings and damage to private property downtown.
Citing boarded-up businesses in the "wounded" city's downtown, the Republicans called for Gov. Andy Beshear to step in and "restore order and security to our neighbors, our property, and our businesses."
Senate President Robert Stivers, R-Manchester, floated the idea of Beshear calling in the National Guard, while Sen. Julie Raque Adams suggested the governor call a special session to take up unspecified legislation on policing reforms.
While there were calls to work with Beshear in the press conference, Senate Majority Floor Leader Damon Thayer, R-Georgetown, also struck a different tone, suggesting that Beshear condoned murder, carjackings and property damage in Louisville because he did not criticize them in his daily COVID-19 press briefings.
Earlier on Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell accepted the endorsement of the Kentucky Fraternal Order of Police in Lexington, decrying the "robbing, rioting and looting" that he said had not been thwarted in cities across the country this summer.
"What you've seen, I think, in some of these major cities is a reluctance on the part of elected officials to enforce the law because of the apparent sympathy with at least some of those protesting," McConnell said.
Also on Tuesday, mailers arrived at houses around Louisville from the Republican Party of Kentucky accusing McConnell's Democratic opponent Amy McGrath of siding with "dangerous, rioting mobs and against brave police officers."
The same law-and-order theme has been at the forefront of President Donald Trump's reelection bid, from his Twitter feed to his visit to Kenosha, Wisconsin, on Tuesday to highlight property damage in the wake of the police shooting of Jacob Blake.
McGarvey said good dialogue on legislation and reform to advance racial justice for Louisville had been ongoing behind the scenes between his Democratic caucus and Senate Republican leaders, but the press conference Tuesday fell back on "a coordinated strategy to blame and finger point instead of offer any type of real solutions or help."
He also said Republicans made no mention that it had been 173 days since the death of Breonna Taylor — who was fatally shot by Louisville police officers in a no-knock raid of her home, sparking widespread protests — and there was still no resolution to Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's investigation of the officers involved in the shooting.
"We want to get back to working with the majority on real bipartisan reforms that will strengthen all communities in Louisville," said McGarvey, adding that Adams in particular has been willing to find bipartisan common ground.
While McGarvey fully backs a bipartisan initiative for a statewide ban on no-knock search warrants, he noted the Louisville Metro Council has already banned such raids, so any legislation in a special session would have to go further to address systemic racism in the city.
Stivers has proposed but not yet drafted legislation to limit the use of no-knock warrants, while Rep. Attica Scott filed "Beonna's Law" three weeks ago to ban no-knock warrants, require officers to activate body cameras when serving a warrant, and require drug and alcohol testing for officers involved in a deadly incident.
Scott also questioned the motives of the Senate GOP leaders, as "they haven't bothered to talk to people like me, who has been on the front lines and actually has a bill that's literally filed for people to review and provide feedback on."
"If they truly want our communities to be healthy and safe, if they truly care about racial justice and police accountability, they will have the hard conversations they need to have with members of the Black Legislative Caucus, who are in the very neighborhoods they're talking about who are protesting for racial justice," Scott said.
Scott also said their language describing Louisville as a hopeless hellscape of violence was "designed to play into this divisive race narrative and class narrative, instead of really being honest that downtown Louisville has not rebounded from the COVID-19 closures. So, stop trying to put that blame on protesters."
She added that Stivers' suggestion for Beshear to call back the National Guard to Louisville showed a "mind-boggling" lack of concern for people's safety, noting a guardsman shot and killed west Louisville business owner David McAtee on June 1 after being directed to that part of the city early that morning "for no reason whatsoever."
"Stop weaponizing the National Guard and state police against Black bodies," Scott said. "Just stop. Instead of a calling in the National Guard, why don't you instead talk to the people and listen to their concerns and then respond accordingly?"
Stivers told The Courier Journal on Wednesday that McGarvey was actually the one playing politics, as the Republicans' press conference Tuesday had to do only with their concern for Louisville.
"There's nothing to be gained by making a political statement right now," Stivers said. "So, there's no politics to this. This is policy."
To make his point, Stivers claimed the outcome of every major political race in Kentucky this November was a foregone conclusion, saying that not only will Trump win easily, but so will McConnell, the state's five Republican congressmen and Democratic U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth.
Stivers added that he thought Republicans are also a lock to keep their supermajorities in both the state House and Senate, even though they might gain or lose a couple of seats.
"There's a statewide mission in Jefferson County and Louisville to the whole state for education, for entertainment, for health care, transportation, the airport, legal, retail," Stivers said. "That's why it is important that we have a strong Louisville, strong Jefferson County."
In response to criticism over her letter to Beshear discussed at the Tuesday press conference, Adams wrote on Twitter that she accepted an invitation to meet the next day with Hannah Drake, a Black poet who has emerged as one of the leaders of the Louisville protest movement demanding justice for Taylor.
Writing that "the letter and the subsequent rhetoric which seemed directed at protesters didn't sit right with me," Drake tweeted a selfie photo of her and Adams on Wednesday night, saying that Adams met her downtown to listen to her concerns.
"That narrative doesn't work when you actually walk/see downtown," Drake wrote. "We walked, we talked, we sipped tea, we shared stories. On the surface we are nothing alike. However when you take the time to see the humanity in people you realize you aren't that different."
Adams tweeted late Wednesday night that Drake taught her "there is a 'holistic' justice occurring downtown focused on systemic racism and changes needed," in addition "a 'specific' justice occurring with regard to the death of Breonna Taylor."
"Both are real, raw and important to the goal of healing this city and both were not fully understood by me until I met my friend Hanna (sic)," Adams tweeted. "I will work on my new narrative. And I encourage everyone to find their Hanna (sic). Opening your mind, opens your heart and opens the door to change."
While Adams and others have talked about new policing reform legislation, the Kentucky State Fraternal Order of Police tweeted out a statement Thursday that police are not the problem that needs reforming.
"There have been many calls for police reform and revamping. I say this: Perhaps we should first reform the political system that allows the current state of affairs to exist in Louisville. We should refine a court system that fails victims and too often allows violent offenders back on the streets. The police, most certainly, are NOT the problem."
The statement from FOP President Burl Perdue Jr. said he agreed with Stivers' sentiments and that "Mayor Fischer had failed Louisville."
Reach reporter Joe Sonka at jsonka@courierjournal.com or 502-582-4472 and follow him on Twitter at @joesonka.
"Instead of a calling in the National Guard, why don't you instead talk to the people and listen to their concerns and then respond accordingly?"
State Rep. Attica Scott
"There's nothing to be gained by making a political statement right now," said state Senate President Robert Stivers, seen earlier this year. "So, there's no politics to this. This is policy."
$$$
