Downtown limps by 'on life support'
Miller, Alfred
16 July 2020
Late on a Friday afternoon, a few determined tourists roamed Louisville's battered downtown landscape.
They were looking for the hustle and bustle that Fourth Street Live promises in its very name.
Instead, they found scarred and boarded up retail shops more than a month after the protests over Breonna Taylor's shooting turned violent.
Rocked by the double whammy of social unrest and a global pandemic, downtown Louisville is struggling to regain its mojo. Local business leaders fear it might not recover.
"We view downtown as really being the key to the economic health of our community," said Sarah Davasher-Wisdom, head of the local chamber of commerce, Greater Louisville Inc. "And right now, we think it's on life support.
"We're very, very concerned."
That's because downtown Louisville's effect on the local economy goes beyond the latest unemployment numbers, which have started to rebound as pandemic-induced lockdowns ease.
Unemployment in Jefferson County surged to 17% in April before dropping to 12% in May.
A large mass of people means economic growth and more productivity.
"You get people together, they're able to collaborate," said Charles Gascon, regional economist for the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. "It also allows you to switch from one employer to the next a little bit easier."
A vibrant downtown is also a feeling by which prospective millennial residents measure Louisville against its peers, says Davasher-Wisdom. But it requires people in the city's office buildings and in the streets.
And people have been largely absent of late, outside of small pockets drawn to the Louisville Slugger factory and other sites on Museum Row.
To solve that problem and to settle on a common message that eventually will be used to lure back visitors, the chamber of commerce has been bringing together business groups for talks about rebooting downtown.
Among the concerns of business owners is safety.
"We're now hearing firsthand that employees are scared to go downtown," said Davasher-Wisdom. "Retailers and restaurants are struggling to attract customers. And there's a long-term concern about branding and perception as a result of all of this. I can't tell you how many business leaders have contacted us about this."
The economic development arm of Louisville's city government insists that downtown is safe.
"What people are seeing on media and social media is the bad, negative stuff," said Rebecca Fleischaker, director of the city's Department of Economic Development. "And downtown, we are saying, is a good place to be open for business and for tourism and for employees."
A spokeswoman said the department does not track reports of crime in the Central Business District.
But belying that message were the many windows that remained boarded up across downtown Friday.
"All of us as downtown businesses want the boards to come down so we look like we're an open city," said Karen Williams, head of the Louisville Convention and Visitors Bureau. "That's a frustration we all have."
The Louisville Tourism Visitor Center itself suffered $60,000 worth of damage and looting during May protests over the police killings of Taylor locally and George Floyd in Minneapolis, Williams said.
The center reopened at the beginning of the month. So far it is seeing a fraction of the number of visitors it normally would.
Over the July Fourth holiday, 119 people visited the center, compared with more than eight times that number, or 986 guests, during the same time last year, according to data from Louisville Tourism.
Fleischaker said businesses are reluctant to make the first move.
"Sometimes people don't want to be the pioneer," she said. "They feel safer when other people are doing it, too."
Among the downtown buildings that had yet to remove boards on Friday was the city building where Fleischaker works.
"The Metro Development Center did get some damage, and that corner of the building still has boards on the first floor simply because we don't have windows to replace all of those that got knocked out," Fleischaker said.
Also hindering the removal of boards is the open question of whether the city will compensate businesses for damage that resulted when protests turned violent.
Asked whether the city had money available to encourage business owners to restore their windows, Fleischaker laughed.
"I don't think we've ever had a pot of money called, 'In Case Windows Are Busted Out,'" Fleischaker said.
In a subsequent emailed statement, Fleischaker said the city is facing a tight budget.
"It is well-known that the city is facing budget constraints, and as I stated during the interview, it is unclear whether there is money to compensate downtown businesses," Fleischaker said in the statement. "While we have received federal CARES dollars, those monies are restricted in how they can be used. Currently, our Department of Economic Development is accepting applications for our Small Business COVID-19 Relief Grants, which will provide up to $50,000 in CARES dollars to businesses impacted by the pandemic."
A spokeswoman for the city's economic development arm said the agency does not have an estimate of the damage downtown Louisville sustained or an estimate of how much lost tax revenue the city has suffered in recent weeks.
To get an estimate of the damage across downtown Louisville and to understand what's preventing business owners from taking down their boards, the Louisville Downtown Partnership is surveying business owners, said the business group's executive director, Rebecca Matheny.
The survey results aren't in yet, but Matheny said it hinges in part on what state Attorney General Daniel Cameron decides in his investigation of the Taylor case.
If protesters aren't satisfied, there is fear that violence may erupt again.
Citing conflicting accounts of whether Mayor Greg Fischer ordered police to "stand down" as protests turned violent, Davasher-Wisdom, the chamber of commerce chief, said businesses need to know how police will respond to such potentially dangerous situations.
"We all need to understand the clear factors that are used to determine when a peaceful demonstration is turning violent and what measures will be put into place to stop that violence from occurring or to deter it from happening in the future," she said.
Also of concern to business leaders is the graffiti that protesters have used to vent their frustration.
On Friday, messages of "F--- 12" (slang for police), "die slow" and "Black power" were still visible on the rear of a World War II memorial at the corner of Jefferson and Fifth streets.
Faded graffiti also obscured the monument's inscription, "They Paid for Peace." Nearby a leaflet called for a boycott of this year's Kentucky Derby.
"I recognize that cleaning these things costs money and takes manpower, and if there's a concern it's going to happen the next day, there may be a hesitation to do that," Davasher-Wisdom said.
But for Davasher-Wisdom, such scenes reflect a lack of pride in the city.
Matheny, whose organization works to remove graffiti, confirmed that she's seen an uptick in graffiti.
"Graffiti is not something that particularly bothers me," Matheny said. "But for a lot of people it gives them a sense of unease and it gives them a sense of displacement. That's the last thing that we want people to feel downtown."
Reach reporter Alfred Miller at amiller@gannett.com or 502-582-7142. Follow him on Twitter @AlfredFMiller. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
The Louisville Visitor Center at Fourth and Market streets in downtown.
$$$
