Louisville mayor says he won't attend Derby due to COVID-19
Yetter, Deborah
21 Aug 2020
In a break with tradition, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer said Thursday he will not attend this year's Kentucky Derby, now scheduled for Sept. 5 after it was postponed in May because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fischer cited the continuing high number of new coronavirus cases and racial justice demonstrations expected in Louisville on Sept. 5. The protests are tied to the death of Breonna Taylor, a Black woman fatally shot by police earlier this year in a case that has attracted national attention.
"I am not planning to attend at this point in time," the mayor said in response to a question at a news briefing. "There will be a lot of things going on in the city that day."
Also, he said, referring to continuing high numbers of new cases of COVID-19, "We've got to be attentive to what these numbers are telling us."
Meanwhile, Gov. Andy Beshear said Thursday he hasn't decided whether to attend the annual event, part of thoroughbred racing's Triple Crown. The Kentucky governor traditionally presents the trophy to the Derby winner.
"I would only go if it is appropriate, given all the circumstances that are out there, if it's safe and if it sets a good example," Beshear said, speaking at a news briefing on COVID-19.
Beshear on Thursday announced 726 new cases of the coronavirus in Kentucky, for a total of 41,626 since early March. He also announced 14 deaths, for a total 856 statewide.
Earlier Thursday, Fischer announced 239 new cases of COVID-19, bringing Louisville's total cases since March to 10,536. He also announced the death of an 82-year-old woman, for 270 total deaths.
And Louisville's rate of positive cases is now at 8.85%, up slightly from Tuesday's rate of 8.71%. Public health officials recommend a rate of 5% or below as a measure of whether the spread of the coronavirus is under control. Kentucky's was 5.18% Thursday.
Fischer's chief medical officer, Dr. Sarah Moyer, has compared COVID-19 in Louisville to a "wildfire."
"Our wildfire is getting more intense and it is spreading," Moyer said at a news conference Tuesday.
At a news conference Aug. 13, Beshear also said he had not decided whether to attend the Derby, though he believes the event can be held safely under plans released Aug. 12 by Churchill Downs for a scaled-back event.
The Derby typically attracts 150,000 fans or more from around the country and is a major showcase for Louisville political and corporate leaders who attend and invite scores of guests.
But Churchill Downs is planning a vastly scaled-back event to try to comply with guidelines to prevent spread of the coronavirus, with fewer than 23,000 fans and no one in the infield.
Demonstrations are expected that day, including one by a Black militia group.
The Not F*cking Around Coalition is returning to Louisville on the day of the Kentucky Derby, leader John "Grandmaster Jay" Johnson said in a video shared to YouTube on Saturday.
The NFAC came to Louisville in late July and marched through the city in a heavily armed demonstration geared toward demanding justice for Taylor, the 26-year-old emergency room technician.
Fischer said he expects Sept. 5 to be a busy day with multiple demands.
"We do expect some people in town for that," he said. "Obviously we want to make sure we're connected to everything that's going on and planning accordingly. Like every day, that will be a busy day, just a little more so with the running of the races."
Reach Deborah Yetter at dyetter@courier-journal.com or 502-582-4228. Find her on Twitter at @d_yetter. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Fischer
People watch from the grandstands at Churchilll Downs' 145th running of the Kentucky Derby on May 4, 2019.
$$$
