Poet uses voice to demand justice
Loosemore, Bailey 
26 July 2020
"I think, with my role as a writer,
I felt compelled to talk about her and to try to bring her story to life."
Hannah Drake
Hannah Drake stands on the steps of City Hall, microphone in hand.
Inside, the Louisville Metro Council has just voted unanimously to pass Breonna's Law, an ordinance banning police use of no-knock search warrants.
Outside, a crowd is already celebrating the decision — one Drake and a small group of activists helped guide.
Drake begins to speak.
She's reciting a poem, "Foundation," that she wrote years ago but that's stayed relevant as reports continue to grow of Black people dying at the hands of police.
Formation
Said firmly with no hesitation
Concern for your tears recently went on vacation
We are unbothered by your hatin' and condemnation
This is Drake's power: her words. And it's how she's begun to help chip away at justice for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was fatally shot by Louisville Metro Police officers who had served a no-knock warrant at her apartment in the early hours of March 13.
Drake, 44, learned of the 26-year-old ER technician's death the next day and was surprised to see barely any information about it on the news.
She took to her social media platforms to express outrage about what happened, but she found her concerns gained little traction.
"I always say for Breonna, she had two things working against her — she was Black, and she was a woman," Drake said. "Those two things are often going to collide when it comes to getting any media coverage.
"With or without (the coronavirus pandemic), it would be a fight just to get attention for Breonna. I think, with my role as a writer, I felt compelled to talk about her and to try to bring her story to life."
In May, after the case began to receive national attention, Drake continued to write and post about Taylor. And she started to dig into the details.
Drake and Keturah Herron, a policy strategist for the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky, began with the warrant that allowed police to enter Taylor's apartment without knocking.
They felt that the warrant should never have included the no-knock clause, and they started putting together a proposal to ban them in Louisville.
"If we could do nothing, I think we knew that the no-knock warrant piece we could change," Drake said.
With other activists, Drake and Herron took their proposal to the Metro Council, where it was introduced by two female legislators.
And for weeks, as Breonna's Law moved through hearings, the group called council members to win their votes and asked people far and wide to demand that the ordinance pass with no provisions.
On June 12, their work paid off. Mayor Greg Fischer signed the ordinance into effect.
"It was just a group of regular people, which I always try to impress upon people," Drake said.
"None of us are attorneys. ... We're just regular people that decided this does not make sense. This person should not have died."
Taylor won't fully get justice until the officers who shot and killed her have been fired and arrested in relation to her death, Drake and others say.
So as long as she can, Drake will continue to keep speaking Taylor's name, keep telling her story and keep demanding change.
This voice is the reincarnation of every one you murdered with no justification
Now YOU bow down ... and simply assume the formation!
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courierjournal.com/baileyl.
"I think, with my role as a writer,
I felt compelled to talk about her and to try to bring her story to life."
Hannah Drake
Poet Hannah Drake uses spoken word to convey her message during a Black Lives Matter healing rally May 31 in front of KFC Yum Center in downtown Louisville. Drake has played a large role at ongoing protests in the city.
$$$
