Jackson demands that Paul apologize
Tobin, Ben
06 June 2020
The Rev. Jesse Jackson says Kentucky U.S. Sen. Rand Paul should apologize for holding up an anti-lynching bill in the U.S. Senate over an amendment.
Jackson, a civil rights leader and former Democratic presidential candidate, told The Courier Journal on Friday that Paul has "misread the times" as protesters across the nation demand that lynching be made a federal hate crime.
Paul's amendment, which has been criticized by several senators, would set a stricter definition for what should be prosecuted as a lynching. Between 1877 and 1934, lynchings of at least 186 African Americans took place in Kentucky.
"Lynching is a form of terrorism that has populated the South and has brought shame upon the face of America," Jackson said. "And so, we hope that Mr. Paul will support the anti-lynching bill and the president will sign it."
He added that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell should use his power to advance the bill.
Jackson will be coming to Louisville on Sunday for a conversation about race and justice with the Rev. Kevin Cosby. Before then, he gave a nearly 30-minute interview with The Courier Journal about a wide swath of topics relating to protests and civil rights.
Here's more of what Jackson said:
Fatal shooting of Taylor and police protection under law Jackson said that the three officers who shot and killed Breonna Taylor should "absolutely" be prosecuted and charged with murder.
Louisville Metro Police raided the home of Taylor, an unarmed African American, on a no-knock warrant to search for drugs. Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired at police, thinking they were intruders. Officers returned fired and killed Taylor. One officer was struck in the leg. No drugs were found.
"They murdered her," Jackson said. "Nobody has the right to murder anybody. Especially those that have a badge and a gun on."
Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove have all been placed on administrative reassignment as the shooting is investigated.
Jackson also condemned police officers' "qualified immunity," a legal rule that has shielded police officers from civil lawsuits.
"When (police officers) violate people and kill people, they should be held personally liable," he said. "They should not hide behind immunity and do things that are unlawful."
Nonviolent protest leading to change For Jackson, the key to success in protests is to refrain from violence. The civil rights leader said Martin Luther King Jr. "would be proud of the nonviolent demonstrations."
"Violence is a diversion," Jackson said. "It's not about burning buildings, it's about justice for people. Violence has the impact of instilling fear."
He added that those who have chosen to break windows and loot buildings "have never been in the spirit of this march."
Additionally, Jackson said he has been heartened by how many white people have been marching in the streets, and that King would be proud of the crowds' diversity.
But he said these protests have to lead to concrete change, including making lynching a federal crime and increasing police accountability. He added that talks of removing Confederate statues, including that of Jefferson Davis from the Kentucky Capitol, are a good step forward.
Fischer 'doing the right thing' Some have expressed frustration with Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer for not doling out punishments to the police officers involved in the shooting of Taylor.
But Jackson said the mayor is a "public servant who is doing the right thing."
Fischer is "convening a broad cross-section of people," he said. "That's all he can do: be a convener."
As for President Donald Trump, Jackson said he has made racial tensions worse.
"(Trump) should show some sympathy to the victims," Jackson said. "He should discourage the behavior."
The Rev. Jesse Jackson speaks with journalists at The Commercial Appeal last year. He spoke to The Courier Journal on Friday about civil rights issues.
$$$
