What if the cops in Taylor case aren't charged?
Gardner, Hayes
16 July 2020
"People are down here, waiting for justice. Justice is not going to come to them the way they're thinking it's going to come."
Neal Robertson
organizer and protester
The police officers stood on one side of Muhammad Ali Avenue at 10 p.m. on July 9, and the protesters stood on the other. In between them sat warm pavement, a thousand degrees of disagreement and a single gallon of tepid water.
Two hours earlier, all had been calm at nearby Jefferson Square Park, where protesters milled about and played basketball. But after protesters blocked a car and lit firecrackers on Liberty Street, police began firing pepper balls from the roof of the Old Jail Building, and the two groups clashed on the ground for the umpteenth time in the past seven weeks.
There had been plenty of productive conversations that night that may have cooled tensions, but in this moment, there was nothing but heat as the protesters aired grievances with the officers, many of whom wore riot gear.
"Put that stick down, b----!" one protester shouted to a particular officer.
The officers had been stoically standing in a line on their side of the street, ignoring insults, but at that moment, the officer lifted the visor on his riot helmet, furiously threw his wooden stick to the ground, and stepped forward into the no man's land that was the street, his arms spread wide and his hands beckoning the jeering protester to come forward.
The protesters, in turn, lurched forward onto the pavement, before fellow officers retrieved the cop and walked him back to his side. Both sides teetered back to their own sidewalk, and the deadlock eventually dissipated.
For 49 days of protests, a fire has burned in Louisville. Sometimes it blazes brightly, sometimes its embers smolder under the surface, but a hot tension remains between outraged protesters and fed-up police. Demonstrators continually protest the March 13 death of Breonna Taylor at the hands of three Louisville police officers — Brett Hankison, Myles Cosgrove and Jonathan Mattingly — and have demanded that each is criminally charged.
It is, however, plausible, that those three are not charged with crimes responsible for her death, according to a legal expert, and if that is the case, it would not only add more fuel to the fire of protests, demonstrators say it could spark an entirely new one.
University of Louisville law professor Samuel Marcosson says that it seems likely Hankison, who has been fired, will be charged, perhaps with wanton endangerment, but that is not necessarily the case for the others.
"I think they're going to be reluctant to bring charges against those other officers. If I had to speculate, my speculation would be that most of the officers will probably not be charged," said Marcosson whose research focuses on constitutional law and civil rights issues.
Because they had a warrant, which Marcosson likened to a "shield" protecting them, it makes it difficult to prosecute them, based on the laws at the time. It's possible that those two officers could be charged with something, perhaps perjury, for example, and they could also be sued by Taylor's estate or face discipline from the Louisville Metro Police Department. But to be charged, as protesters have demanded, with crimes responsible for her death?
"I think that's a pretty low likelihood," Marcosson said.
Neal Robertson, an organizer and protester, cited history repeating itself to explain why he believes that one or more of the officers will not be convicted, let alone charged.
"What are they gonna convict him of? Doing his job?" he asked.
To him, the officers not being charged is a question of "when, not if," and it could be a catalyst for the protests.
"It's going to be a boiling point, where the temperature is going to be over 100," he said. "People are down here, waiting for justice. Justice is not going to come to them the way they're thinking it's going to come."
He said protesters are going to be "aggressive," because their emotions will be running high. Since Tyler Gerth was shot and killed at Jefferson Square Park last month, there have been more people openly carrying firearms at the protests.
Attorney David Mour, who has been protesting at Jefferson Square Park and offering demonstrators legal advice pro bono, described the scenario as a "powder keg."
"If those officers aren't charged with crimes that place responsibility for her death — murder, manslaughter, reckless homicide, whatever degree of that ... " he said, "I think there's going to be a repeat, to some degree, maybe worse, of the first weekend."
Protesters have advocated from the beginning for those three officers to be fired, charged and convicted, and signs and chants, such as "No justice, no peace, prosecute the police," have belabored the point.
Protesters are growing impatient, and they won't be satisfied if all three officers are not charged in Taylor's death.
"I'm gonna tell you, I'm not going to be happy, but only God knows how I'm going to react," protester Antonio Brown said.
Said protester Chaunda Lee: "This whole city is going to be turned upside down."
Rioters and looters destroyed property and smashed windows during the opening weekend of protests in May, but since then, the protests have been largely peaceful with the exception of Gerth's death. Steven Lopez, who had frequented Jefferson Square Park, is accused in the fatal shooting.
Protesters have set off firecrackers, extinguished law enforcement's eternal flame and attempted to trespass into the Old Jail Building last week, but the protests have primarily consisted of peaceful marches for more than a month now. That may change if the officers are not charged.
A new fire, one that is even harder to extinguish, could spark.
"If you do anything short of charging these guys with responsibility for her death, I don't think this downtown area will be here," Mour said. "It's sad, and I don't advocate it, I don't endorse it, I'm not for violence, I don't want it, but it's just like when the Rodney King verdict came out."
The vast majority of demonstrators have advocated for peaceful protests, and some said that they would continue to remain peaceful, even if the officers are not charged, although they predicted others would not be as calm.
Dr. Muhammad Babar, a University of Louisville physician and social leader, has marched with medical students in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. Due to concerns about the coronavirus, he has not regularly protested, but he said he's proud of the peace and hopes things remain that way.
"Peaceful movements are a lot more effective, and they gain more positive results than the violent movements," he said.
In response to the possibility of more aggressive protests, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's office said the city and LMPD have "public safety plans in the case of unlawful protests."
"The mayor has said repeatedly that what's important is that the truth comes out — and regardless of the outcome, we must work together to collectively move the community forward," spokeswoman Jessica Wethington said in a statement. "The mayor urges everyone to take the energy of this moment and respond with a commitment to non-violent and lawful action that will strengthen and build our community."
Each night, protesters gather at Jefferson Square Park, and each night, officers watch and monitor them from above the Old Jail Building. In between them sits a street named Liberty.
Brown is there most days, and he's angry; he believes that there can't be a revolution without blood.
"Give me liberty, or give me death," he said.
"People are down here, waiting for justice. Justice is not going to come to them the way they're thinking it's going to come."
Neal Robertson
organizer and protester
Letters spell "Breonna" in Jefferson Square Park.
$$$
