Davis statue to be removed
Sonka, Joe
13 June 2020
FRANKFORT — A state commission voted Friday to remove the statue of Jefferson Davis from where it has stood in the Capitol Rotunda in Frankfort for 84 years.
The state Historic Properties Advisory Commission called the special meeting Friday at the request of Gov. Andy Beshear, who said last week the statue of the Confederate president is an offensive symbol of slavery that should be moved to another location.
The commission, which met remotely through video teleconferencing, voted to remove the Davis statue by an 11-1 vote.
The only member to vote against the statue's removal was Brandon Wilson, an appointee of former Gov. Matt Bevin.
The approved motion also called for moving the statue to the Jefferson Davis Monument State Historic Site in Todd County, where the Confederate leader was born.
By late afternoon, workers had erected a rig that will be used to lift the 5-ton statue off its base. The crew of about 15 workers took a group photo in front of the soon-to-be gone statue and knocked off for the day just after 6 p.m. Work is scheduled to resume Saturday morning.
The governor said Thursday he wanted the Davis statue gone from the Capitol Building "as quickly as possible" if the commission voted his way.
Beshear had said it is "long past due" to remove the statue, as many African Americans visiting their Capitol see it "as a symbol that they don't matter, a symbol of the enslavement of their ancestors and a symbol of the continued systematic racism that we see in so many parts of our society."
Davis was placed in the Rotunda in 1936 at the urging of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, which commissioned the 12-foot marble statue.
The calls to remove the statue of the Civil War president of the Confederacy have grown in recent weeks, as large protests in Louisville and throughout Kentucky developed from the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed black woman shot eight times in her home by Louisville Metro Police Department officers.
Protests over police brutality against African Americans proliferated around the country after the May 25 killing of George Floyd by a police officer in Minneapolis, with the movement adding the removal of Confederate monuments to its list of demands.
Protesters toppled a Davis statue in Richmond, Virginia, on Wednesday evening, which had stood along the city's Monument Avenue since 1907.
Cathy Thomas, who was Beshear's first appointment on the commission in January, argued for the removal of the Davis statue in the meeting, saying it was placed in the Rotunda during the Jim Crow era to reaffirm white supremacy, amid threats of lynchings and segregation that were prevalent the time.
"He enslaved human beings, he rebelled against the United States of America," Thomas said. "He is a symbol of the Confederacy that might still have me in chains."
Wilson, a sales manager at a Somerset car dealership and the lone "no" vote on the commission, decried the "cultural movement" trying to "remove history," calling the removal of Davis a "slippery slope" that could lead to the purge of other statues of historical figures.
Saying he meant no offense to first lady Britainy Beshear – a nonvoting member of the commission who had just spoken in favor of removal – Wilson added: "I believe Gov. Beshear is politicizing this as a weapon, using our board as a weapon to get his agenda over."
After decrying the vote as removal of history, Wilson attempted a motion to remove all statues from the Capitol building, which was ruled out of order.
Jon Park – one of five remaining Bevin appointees on the board – cast a "reluctant" vote in favor of removal, saying he was torn by the decision and didn't want to open a "Pandora's Box" that could lead to the removal of other statues.
"His early history, he was the things that were on that plaque that was removed by this commission – hero, statesman, patriot – he was those things," said Park, who works for Attorney General Daniel Cameron. "He took a bad career choice. He did something he shouldn't have done."
A previous effort to remove the Davis statue in Frankfort – spurred by white supremacist violence in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 2017 – was rebuffed by the Historic Properties Advisory Commission in 2018, when it instead voted only to remove a plaque on it calling Davis a "war hero."
Former Gov. Matt Bevin said as a candidate for the office in 2015 that he supported removing the Davis statue, only to later oppose it as governor, saying it would be a "sanitization of history."
Cameron – Kentucky's first African American attorney general who was sworn into office in the Rotunda in January – said last week he favored the statue's removal.
State Sen. Chris McDaniel, R-Taylor Mill, announced Thursday he was prefiling a bill to remove the Davis statue in case the commission failed to act, which would also appropriate $500,000 to replace it with one of Carl Brashear, an African American Kentuckian who was a celebrated U.S. Navy master diver.
Beshear said Thursday he wanted a "robust discussion" over what would replace the Davis statue in the Rotunda, though he called Brashear "an amazing Kentuckian and obviously someone worthy of conversation about having their statue there."
The nine other commission members voting in favor of removal on Friday were: Beshear appointees Samuel Devine, Angela Lampe and Darren Taylor; Bevin appointee Thomas Stephens; Chairman Stephen Collins, who was first appointed by former Gov. Steve Beshear and reappointed by Bevin; Historic Properties Director Carol J. Mitchell, Kentucky Heritage Council Executive Director Craig Potts, Governor's Mansion Executive Director Ann Evans and Kentucky Historical Society Executive Director Scott Alvey. Bevin appointee Marion Forcht was absent from the meeting.
$$$
