Spotlight on racial injustice with art
30 Aug 2020
This year's GSA took place June 29 through July 17 — 14 weeks after the killing of Breonna Taylor by police in her Louisville apartment, and only four weeks after the killing of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police.
"I am Black.
I am Muslim.
I am not a terrorist."
Those lines were from Valley High School senior Sona Ali's slam poem she penned when a Kentucky Governor's School for the Arts' drama instructor asked students to write about "their story."
Ali wrote about the discrimination she faced for being Black and Muslim.
Dakota Perry, a drama student and a senior at Rowan County Senior High School, wrote: "They only cover Black Lives Matter when the glass shatters."
Both were among 30 students in the class. Some wrote about the fear they live in with racial discrimination. The students split into groups of three to read their slam poems — all in a virtual session.
GSA announced in early May it would be virtual.
This year's GSA took place June 29 through July 17 — 14 weeks after the killing of Breonna Taylor by police in her Louisville apartment, and only four weeks after the killing of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police. Both were Black, and their killings ignited protests across the country. With that backdrop, GSA worked to spotlight racial injustice.
As a virtual program, Kentucky Performing Arts, which runs GSA, restructured all activities. All 250 students started the day with an opening meeting with special guests before they broke off into smaller groups to focus on their art form. They didn't spend the day at the University of Kentucky's campus, as originally planned, but adapted to learning from their homes. Many sessions also featured artists of color who talked about being a minority in the art world and their experiences relating to Black Lives Matter.
During the first week, guest artist, songwriter and vocalist Martha Redbone performed a few songs with collaborator Aaron Whitby, displaying the blues, gospel, soul, Appalachian folk and Native American styles she blends. She talked about being a Native American and Black woman in the music industry.
"My calling was to be different and be a part of the community to tell a story," said Redbone, who also composed music for the award-winning 2019 revival of the 1970s play by Ntozake Strange, "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow is Enuf." "In this climate of COVID-19 and Black Lives Matter, the violence we see is not the way forward," Redbone said.
Her talk made an impression.
"Martha made her art and activism one thing instead of separate," said Breonna Lovins, a drama student and Breathitt County High School senior. "I remember her talking about how she was Native American and Black as well as a woman in the music industry. She talked about how much oppression she went through. You could just feel her hurt. Everyone was sending so much love in the chat, but also everyone was rendered speechless."
Students' experiences with discrimination surfaced in student workshops, like the drama session that included Ali.
"Doing that assignment reminded me of being bullied once in my life and being called a terrorist," Ali said. "I wanted people to know me being a Black girl and a Muslim doesn't make me a threat to society."
Ali's words touched other drama students, especially Lovins.
"My heart broke," Lovins said. "How could someone see this beautiful, sweet and talented girl as a terrorist?"
Poet Hannah Drake and Louisville Ballet dancer Brandon Ragland discussed their individual work and their collaboration together in Louisville Ballet's 2018 Choreographers' Showcase.
During their session, Drake recited her poem "Ain't I a Mother," with lines including, "My son was a good kid, but good Black boys scream from the graves daily," followed later by hope. "One day his skin won't be his sentence."
The two talked about creating pieces using her words and his dancing, the prejudice they have experienced, police brutality and the importance of art to give voice to racial injustice and in trying times like now with the pandemic.
"She was a beautiful soul and a powerful speaker," Perry said. "It was very powerful watching their art forms combining. They covered the Black Lives Matter movement, and you could see how hurt they were, through her words and his dance motions."
The pandemic Students also wove ideas about the pandemic into their own artwork. The visual art students' each created a portrait of a woman of color working in the health care industry during this pandemic to contribute to the Denver-based nationwide project called "Women of Color on the Front Lines."
"So many of our healers on the front lines are people of color, who are often underappreciated," said Susan Harrison, a GSA visual arts instructor.
In many sessions, Black students and other students of color were able to share their experiences of racism, and white students had an opportunity to listen and learn. Each session provided time for students to ask the artists questions about everything from their careers to how discrimination has affected them.
During the session with Actors Theatre of Louisville Artistic Director Robert Barry Fleming, Perry asked Fleming what he could read to educate himself on racial issues. Perry lives in Morehead and felt distant from current events because of a lack of protests in his area. Fleming recommended three books. Perry and other students took note.
"Being a white male in Kentucky, I've never faced racial discrimination, and in GSA we were able to hear Black people's experience," Perry said. "It was really eye-opening. I can sympathize, and I can learn what other people feel, especially with the Confederate flag and statues."
In the program's final days, Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear spoke about the importance of art helping to understand how someone else feels.
"We are seeing cries, demands for justice, and sometimes art has been the most effective way of helping people to see from someone else's eyes," Beshear said, "how walking into our state capitol and seeing the president of the Confederacy might make someone feel."
Beshear also spoke about the importance of creativity and the power of art in helping to inform people.
"I believe what is going to drive us moving forward in our economy is our creativity," he said. "Each of you all are leaders and you don't get enough credit for it. But it's time we start paying attention. They see your willingness to do GSA virtually and hopefully your willingness to wear a mask."
GSA students also were able to see how artists coped with the pandemic by continuing to create. In mid-March, Lexington-based artists and Transylvania University professors Kurt Gohde and Kremena Todorova created the project "Lexington in the Time of COVID-19."
"We wanted to create something positive to show people that somehow we will survive this virus," Todorova said. "The question was: How do you make an artwork that engages people when we are supposed to social distance when we should not get closer to each other than 6 feet? Our idea was to photograph people outside of their homes — on their front porch, and the back of the home — then ask them about handling the pandemic, and what was on their minds."
Instructors see value in having GSA students meet artists using this time to continue creative work and create work that reflects current history.
"You still have to do your art in spite of everything, that is a tremendous lesson from 2020 that students wouldn't get any other years," Harrison said.
Debra Murray, a 2020 graduate of Pleasure Ridge Park High School, is entering her freshman year at Western Kentucky University as a journalism major this fall. She also was an Arts Bureau Edge reporter covering Actors Theatre of Louisville's 2019 Humana Festival of New American Plays. Arts Bureau Edge is an independent arts journalism program led by former Courier Journal reporter Elizabeth Kramer that was created to invest in young people and empower them to report on the region's creative forces.
This year's GSA took place June 29 through July 17 — 14 weeks after the killing of Breonna Taylor by police in her Louisville apartment, and only four weeks after the killing of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police.
Your Turn
Debra Murray
Guest columnist
Todorova
Drake
Artists Aaron Whitby and Martha Redbone did a virtual session with the Governor's School for the Arts.
Actors Theatre of Louisville Artistic Director Robert Barry Fleming spoke to heater students about equity.
Artists Kremena Todorova's and Kurt Gohde's, creators of "Lexington in the Time of COVID-19," spoke to Kentucky Governor's School for the Arts students.
Images from artists Kremena Todorova's and Kurt Gohde's project "Lexington in the Time of COVID-19." The two spoke to students about creating art.
University of Kentucky Opera Theatre graduate Denisha Ballew was on a panel with other alumni who spoke to students.
Photos Courtesy Kentucky Performing Arts
Ragland
Gohde
$$$
