Attorneys detail how Taylor settlement came together
Duvall, Tessa; Costello, Darcy
20 Sep 2020
Tamika Palmer's hands were shaking.
The 12-page document she was signing that Monday stipulated the city would pay her $12 million – a record settlement against the Louisville Metro Police Department.
And it promised more than a dozen police reforms she hoped would save another mother her grief after police fatally shot her daughter, Breonna Taylor, on March 13.
Still, Palmer was apprehensive.
Would people understand, she wondered, that her signature didn't mean she was abandoning her fight for justice for her daughter?
"She knew how important reform was, and she knew that the only form of justice we could get from the civil system, from a jury, (was) money," Sam Aguiar, a Louisville-based attorney for Palmer, told The Courier Journal.
"But there was a still a part of her that just wanted to not feel like it was perceived as a sellout."
The settlement, announced Tuesday, marked the culmination of a legal tug of war that began April 27, when she sued the officers who she contended blindly fired shots throughout Taylor's apartment.
In a May 11 email, Aguiar warned Mayor Greg Fischer more than two weeks before protesters took to Louisville's streets about what would happen "if the silence continues."
"We both know that if the pandemic were not here, thousands of protesters would be flooding the city streets over this situation," Aguiar wrote. "But their voices are very active right now online."
He had reason to be confident.
The same day, the legal team added Ben Crump, a renowned civil rights attorney who has taken on several prominent cases of Black Americans killed by police.
But Aguiar got no response – not from Fischer, not from anyone at Metro Hall.
Until mid-August, when Palmer's attorneys and city officials sat together to hash out not only a cash settlement, but what it would take to help heal Louisville's racial divide.
Last week, after more than 120 days of protest, one fired police chief and a nationwide "justice for Breonna" movement, Fischer, Palmer and her attorneys stood together in Metro Hall to announce they had reached an accord.
It wouldn't end things, Palmer vowed.
"As significant as today is, it's only the beginning of getting full justice for Breonna," Palmer said Tuesday. "We must not lose focus on what the real drive is."
During a wide-ranging interview Thursday, Palmer's Louisville-based attorneys, Lonita Baker and Aguiar, described the lengthy negotiations that led to that record settlement.
County Attorney Mike O'Connell and Fischer declined to be interviewed, but their respective offices provided written statements.
While the city can't control what Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron decides about charging the officers, Fischer said settling the civil case was the best result for all involved.
"The bottom line for me was this: When you know what the right thing to do is, you do it," Fischer said in a statement.
"Why wait?"
How attorneys got involved with Breonna Taylor case Aguiar was in Florida when his firm got the call March 13 that "something had gone terribly wrong."
Bianca Austin, Taylor's aunt, called the law firm on behalf of Palmer and told them her niece had been shot dead in her apartment by police.
When Baker and Aguiar canvassed the outside of the apartment March 19 and then got inside March 22, "it was mind-blowing," Aguiar said.
"It was pretty damn clear at that point that something went terribly wrong and that ... the initial report was just not even 10% of the story surrounding it," he said.
Over the days and weeks ahead, Aguiar and Baker sought to piece together what really happened in the early hours of March 13.
Shortly before 1 a.m., plainclothes officers arrived at Taylor's apartment with a no-knock search warrant, looking for drugs and cash as part of a larger narcotics investigation.
Police said they knocked and then announced their presence, but inside, Taylor and her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, said they never heard an answer when they asked who was there, Walker later told investigators.
Officers used a battering ram to knock open the door, and Walker fired a single shot from his Glock pistol, telling police later he didn't realize it was police knocking.
Police say his shot hit Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the left leg, puncturing an artery. Mattingly, and officers Myles Cosgrove and Brett Hankinson, opened fire, firing more than two-dozen rounds that sprayed the apartment and an adjoining unit.
Five rounds hit Taylor, and she died in her hallway.
Baker and Aguiar, both New England Patriots fans, had been working together since 2017, a little over a decade after they sat next to one another in a University of Louisville law school class on professional responsibility.
Aguiar says he's a recluse who likes drafting documents, while Baker is a people person. He's blunt, and she's reassuring.
Together, it works.
In the Baker's first meeting with the family, just a few days after the shooting, Juniyah Palmer told Baker she hadn't been able to go to her room in the apartment she shared with her big sister, Breonna, to get clothes for her funeral.
Baker recalled she had a "sixth sense" that something was off about the night Taylor was killed. Aguiar concurred, saying "things didn't add up."
"I had that gut feeling that Sam and I had to figure out what happened," Baker said. "... Knowing it was going to be a fight and a battle, I let Tamika and the family know what lies ahead."
The attorneys set to work asking the city to preserve documents and filing records requests. But by late April, they were at a stalemate.
LMPD was slow-walking the release of documents, Aguiar said.
"We knew that the only way we were going to get information is with subpoena power," he said. "Basically, we made the decision."
They had to sue.
On April 27, Palmer filed suit against Mattingly, Hankison and Cosgrove in Jefferson County Circuit Court. It received little news coverage.
It was Baker's friendship with Crump, the Florida-based attorney, that persuaded him to join the suit. As with any case Crump touches, the media spotlight soon followed.
"This case immediately garnered some good momentum," Aguiar said.
'This Breonna Taylor situation is only going to get worse' On May 11, the same day Crump joined Taylor's family's case, Aguiar issued a stark warning to Fischer.
"This Breonna Taylor situation is only going to get worse if the silence continues," he wrote in an email sent just before 9:30 a.m.
"We both know that if the pandemic were not here, thousands of protesters would be flooding the city streets over this situation. But their voices are very active right now online. This may be mitigated if the case is handled properly and with transparency."
In the note, Aguiar requested an independent investigation, saying, "LMPD should think twice about policing itself." He also asked for an update on the investigation.
"It would go a long way for Breonna's family to get some assurance that the matter is being taken seriously and receiving some transparency into the process," he wrote to Fischer, including his cell phone number.
"If handled correctly, the city could set a nice example for how these situations should be addressed."
Aguiar said he heard nothing in response.
By the end of May, Aguiar was proven right: Thousands of protesters had taken over Louisville's streets, shouting at police, who unleashed pepper balls and tear gas to disperse the crowds.
As the protests continued night after night, Fischer looked for ways to show that he was listening to their concerns.
During June, Fischer ordered a "top-to-bottom" review of LMPD; fired Hankison, accusing the officer of firing wildly into Taylor's apartment; changed the city's tear gas policy; and signed "Breonna's Law," an ordinance banning no-knock warrants in Louisville.
Still, protests persisted.
In early July, Aguiar's team filed a revised lawsuit with fresh allegations: Taylor's death, it said, was the result of a Metro Government and police effort to clear out a city block in the Russell neighborhood for gentrification.
The accusations drew loud protests from City Hall and development groups.
Not long after, Aguiar dropped off a letter for Louisville officials and the county attorney's office stating his clients' demands.
It contained a monetary demand Aguiar declined to disclose, along with many of the reforms that later became part of the settlement.
Once again, he said, he heard nothing.
Meanwhile, the cries of "justice for Breonna" were growing louder, both in Louisville and across the country.
More than 100 protesters marched to Cameron's home in East Louisville on July 14 to demand that charges be filed against the three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment, killing her.
A change.org petition demanding justice for Taylor gathered 10 million signatures. And media magnate Oprah Winfrey surrendered the cover of her "O" magazine for the first time in 241 issues. Instead of Oprah, the covered featured Taylor's face.
Toward the end of July, Crump began asking Aguiar and Baker about the city's approach to civil cases and whether they saw any likelihood of a settlement.
Attorneys agreed: if ever there was a situation where the city and community could benefit from early talks and a settlement, "it had to be now," Aguiar said.
'This is about true change' In mid-August, the same day Taylor's family met with Cameron, Baker and Crump made a case to city officials it was time to push through police reform to help heal the city.
Crump pulled from his experience working with cities moving forward after police shootings of Black Americans, such as Ferguson, Missouri.
And Baker was frank about people's disenchantment with the Fischer administration.
The playbook you've been operating by, she told the mayor, and the people you've been using for insight? They don't have the answers.
Their message to Fischer and other city officials: "It's not a show. It's not about money," Baker said. "This is about true change."
From there, the tide began to turn, Baker said, and city officials appeared more open to negotiating reforms to Louisville's police department.
O'Connell, the county attorney, told Metro Council members at a committee meeting Thursday that negotiations started Aug. 12, after an initial demand in July.
"We went back and forth for 30 days," O'Connell said.
The mayor's office "made the decision that it was in the best interest of the community and the parties to settle at the time," O'Connell said.
The bulk of policy negotiations took about a week – with Deputy Mayor Ellen Hesen, Baker and Sarah Martin from the Jefferson County Attorney's Office hashing out the details and pulling case law.
"Early on, it was very clear that Ms. Palmer was very interested in including reforms in the settlement," Martin told council members Thursday.
Aguiar wouldn't say what dollar figures were discussed, but ultimately, $12 million was agreed to by both sides – an amount that dwarfed the city's previous record $8.5 million settlement in 2012.
The figure needed to send a message, Aguiar said, "that this isn't going to be tolerated any further.
"Ultimately, what they gave us is not far from where we started."
Settlement's speed 'defies all laws of gravity' The speed and timing of the settlement – negotiated in less than five months despite the criminal investigation into Taylor's death still unfinished – dismayed some critics.
Some Metro Council members and police union leaders said the city capitulated prematurely and abandoned its officers before it was proven they had done anything wrong.
"We should all withhold judgment until the attorney general has presented all evidence to a grand jury," Jeffersontown Police Chief Rick Sanders, a former Kentucky State Police commissioner and Jefferson County police officer, posted on Facebook last week.
Christopher 2X, a local activist, said he'd seen past egregious cases of misconduct where Metro Government showed "no urgency" in settling civil cases. He attributed the quick pace of this case to the increased attention surrounding it since mid-May.
"No one can dismiss that," he said. "It defies all laws of gravity that this would go down the way that it did."
But Aguiar believed in acting on the advice he was given long ago: "The best time to settle is now."
"If there's going to be a settlement, let's show right now that the city stepped up and maybe conceded it could have done things better," he said.
The settlement, however, doesn't admit wrongdoing on behalf of the city or officers in Taylor's death, and it prevents Palmer from suing the city in the future.
The attorneys also must return or destroy any records obtained through the lawsuit while under court order to remain confidential.
But, Aguiar and Baker say they're not done. They're looking at hiring a lobbyist to help push legislative reform in Frankfort. They want to support the activists who have demanded answers from the city.
And, they still want to see the three officers charged.
"I said that since day one, the only way you really win at these cases is to try to change the laws," Baker said. "Because that's the only way it's going to stop."
After the settlement announcement Tuesday, she walked out of Metro Hall to dozens of supporters telling her they loved her and chanting about justice.
It showed Palmer people were still in her corner, Baker said later. She hadn't lost their support, and they knew the movement wasn't over.
As Palmer spoke, the crowd went quiet.
"Pressure applied," she said, choking up. "Pressure applied."
Courier Journal reporter Andrew Wolfson contributed to this story.
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Tamika Palmer speaks at the podium used by Gov. Andy Beshear for daily briefings in June. Palmer and her attorney, Lonita Baker, left, called for the officers involved in Breonna Taylor's death to be fired.
Courtesy of Gov. Andy Beshear's Office
$$$
