Armed militias converge in Louisville, escalating tensions
Kenning, Chris; Bailey, Phillip M; Gardner, Hayes; EADENS, SAVANNAH; Tobin, Ben
26 July 2020
"For the most part, we've seen peaceful protest."
Lavita Chavous
Louisville Police deputy chief
Two opposing, heavily armed militia groups came within a few dozen yards of each of other in downtown Louisville on Saturday in a tense standoff that ended without violence, but marked an escalation after two months of ongoing protests over the police shooting of a Black woman.
More than 300 members of the Atlanta-based Black militia NFAC, or "Not F***ing Around Coalition" came to Louisville demanding justice for 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, an ER technician who was fatally shot by officers in March.
Wearing all black and carrying assault rifles, members marched in military-style formation from Baxter Park in the Russell neighborhood to Metro Hall where they stopped around 2:45 p.m. at police barricades.
Right across was a smaller group of 50 far-right "Three Percenter" militia members, who were also heavily armed.
The opposing militia said it showed up in response to NFAC and to aid police. As the two sides neared, one Three Percenter yelled "Don't fire unless you're fired upon!" as police in riot gear stood nearby and helicopters buzzed.
Police kept the sides apart and tensions eventually dissipated. Both militias had said they wanted to avoid violence.
John "Grandmaster Jay" Johnson, founder of the NFAC, delivered a fiery speech calling for local and state officials to speed up and be more transparent about the investigation into Taylor's shooting.
Otherwise, he warned that leaders can expect more outrage from local residents and outside activists.
"If you don't tell us nothing we going to think you ain't doing nothing," Johnson said.
The militia leader said Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron had told him that Louisville officials had botched the investigation and that it could take another four weeks to finish.
Cameron's office said Saturday he "did not comment on any specifics related to the timeline of the investigation" and Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer's office denied there were concerns about the police work.
"We understand the desire for truth & ask that to be the focus of demonstrations, not violence. We continue to work diligently in pursuit of the truth by conducting an independent investigation into the death of Ms. Taylor," Cameron tweeted on Saturday.
Johnson also said the NFAC group plans to stay in Louisville and "build community policing" strategies and improve public safety.
He ended a speech downtown by saying that NAFC is giving Cameron and the Breonna Taylor investigation four weeks from today to "tell the truth."
After the group marched out of downtown, Louisville Police deputy chief Lavita Chavous acknowledged that it had been a "tension-filled day."
"For the most part, we've seen peaceful protest," she said, but she denounced "those hiding behind the right to peacefully assemble and using it as a platform to tear up and destroy our city."
"I'm asking people to respect the legal process, and the time that it takes, to choose peace and not violence to continue to exercise your rights to protest, but do it lawfully," Chavous said.
There were gun-related injuries, however. Earlier in the day, three people were taken to a hospital with non-life-threatening injuries after they were struck by gunfire when someone's gun discharged at the NFAC gathering at Baxter Park. Police also made five protest-related arrests.
NFAC's presence was welcomed by some local Black Lives Matter activists, even though some protesters bristled and said they weren't needed.
Shameka Parrish-Wright, co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Oppression has been organizing the ongoing downtown protests, said she didn't want anyone "shot or killed, but I celebrate them coming in and taking a stand and pushing our local and state government to do something better."
She said many are growing frustrated after nearly two months of protests, and only one of the Louisville Metro Police Officers involved had been fired.
"I hope that our government listens to somebody, because they're not listening to us. So I don't know what it's gonna take for them to listen, but we cannot keep doing things the same old good ole boy way in Kentucky. That day has gone," she said.
The day drew national attention in part because of the potential for violence with two opposition militia groups in town.
Tara Brandau, a leader of a Kentucky Three Percenters group, denied that NFAC's role as Black militia played into their decision to come to Louisville or that they were white nationalists. Brandau said they came to assist police and discourage violence. Some came from other states including Indiana and Tennessee.
Nick Alsager, who held an assault rifle with others from the Three Percenters, said NAFC had a constitutional right to make their voices heard, but he didn't approve of them coming to Louisville. He said the city had already been buffeted by protests and hoped they would end as the investigation is finished.
"You got no business being here. It ain't your state," he said of the group.
That same militia also came to Louisville in July 2018 to counterprotest against a group demonstrating against President Donald Trump's immigration policies.
Three Percenters stirred controversy in late May when the local group's president, Terry Bush, hoisted an effigy of Gov. Andy Beshear from a tree at the Kentucky Capitol during a "Patriot Day 2nd Amendment Rally."
Earlier Saturday, NAFC began assembling at Baxter Park where hundreds of their militia members signed up to participate in the formation march.
Group members kept a close watch on those who entered the park and had security checks on those who sought to participate.
NFAC would at various times escort away anyone who they felt was trying to disrupt their demonstration while asking local residents and reporters to keep a certain distance.
Louisville activist LeBron Seay said he fully supported NFAC coming to the city because it showed Black residents and other activists there needs to be more options besides traditional nonviolent protests.
"This is something that is definitely needed," he said. "Protesting the same ways is not working; marching is not working; posters is not working; sit-ins is not working, and this is to let the people know we do have a backbone and it's time for change."
Seay said he spoke with NFAC leaders about the need for more community-based policing, and that activist groups have to think outside the box amid the ongoing acts of civil disobedience in the city.
Leading up to the march there were multiple arguments between militia members and local activists, however.
A handful of people confronted NFAC members saying they didn't appreciate being ordered around by the group when they had been on the frontlines in support of Taylor for weeks.
But the vast majority of local activists and neighbors said they were comforted by the group's presence and argued they came to help.
"It might make things worse in some circles, but overall it makes things better because we're not afraid," said Roger Dhahabu, 64, who carried a red, black and green flag representing African Americans around Baxter Park. "I'm not afraid to die right now for the right cause."
Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@gannett.com. Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at pbailey@courier-journal.com.
Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"For the most part, we've seen peaceful protest."
Lavita Chavous
Louisville Police deputy chief
Members of the NFAC held their guns in the air before starting their march to Metro Hall on Saturday. The group's founder, John Johnson, said the NFAC plans to stay in Louisville and "build community policing" strategies and improve public safety.
Pat McDonogh/The Courier Journal
The Three Percenters also came to Louisville in 2018.
$$$
