A 'light to help heal'
Wolfson, Andrew; Costello, Darcy; Duvall, Tessa
16 Sep 2020
Calling Breonna Taylor a "light to help heal what's happening in America," attorneys and Louisville city officials on Tuesday unveiled a record-breaking $12 million settlement for her family that includes a host of police reforms.
The payout — announced six months after Taylor, 26, was fatally shot in her apartment March 13 — is the largest ever on behalf of Louisville police, dwarfing a previous $8.5 million settlement from 2012 when Edward Chandler was falsely sent to prison for nine years.
It is also among the largest payouts in the U.S. for the shooting of a Black American by police.
The settlement also makes a series of changes to Louisville Metro Police policy and practices designed to strengthen officers' connections to the community, reform the search warrant process and make officers more accountable and their actions more transparent.
The Taylor family said those changes were particularly important to help prevent future victims like Breonna.
The agreement between attorneys and Louisville Metro Government ends a civil lawsuit filed in April by Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, against the three officers who fired their weapons at Taylor's apartment, killing her in the hallway.
The settlement, however, does not admit any wrongdoing on the part of the city or the police, and it prevents Taylor's family from suing again in the future.
It also closes one chapter in the tragic story of Taylor's death, which has ignited more than 100 days of protest in Louisville and unleashed a torrent of national figures calling for "justice for Breonna" and the arrest of the officers who fired their weapons.
Media magnate Oprah Winfrey, for instance, put Taylor on the cover of her magazine, the first time she has featured someone other than herself. She also commissioned 26 billboards about Taylor's case across the Louisville metro area.
Breonna Taylor slaying become a national symbol for injustice Taylor's death has also thrust the issue of racial injustice to the forefront in a city where Black residents are in poorer health and have less income and far fewer economic opportunities in the highly segregated West End.
And the still unresolved criminal investigation remains an open wound, with Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron giving no timeline on when a decision will be made on whether charges will be filed against the officers in Taylor's death.
A Jefferson County grand jury may hear that case as soon as this week. And the FBI is also conducting a separate investigation.
Several speakers at Tuesday's press conference, including Until Freedom's Tamika Mallory and Florida-based attorney Ben Crump, called for the officers in Taylor's case to be fired and charged.
Crump called for "at minimum" second-degree manslaughter charges and for nonviolent protesters to see any charges against them dropped.
Mallory, a leader of the Until Freedom group, said that police officers "responsible for killing Breonna Taylor" must be arrested, in order for the community to feel calm.
"Justice for Breonna Taylor," Mallory said. "And if there's ain't going to be no justice, there ain't going to be no peace. A settlement is restitution, but it's not arresting the cops."
'Justice for Breonna is multi-layered' But Tuesday's agreement was also about taking the first steps toward reconciliation, with city officials, with lawyers for Taylor's family and protest leaders making the first attempt at mending the wound caused by her slaying.
Each praised the others for working together to forge an agreement that would bring change to local policing.
Mayor Greg Fischer, at Tuesday's press conference, called out Taylor's death as a "tragedy" that ignited a movement in Louisville and the nation, sending thousands of people into the streets crying out for justice.
"Breonna was loved," Fischer said. "I cannot begin to imagine Ms. Palmer's pain, and I am deeply, deeply sorry for Breonna's death."
Lonita Baker, a Louisville-based attorney for Taylor's family, said Tuesday that "justice for Breonna is multi-layered," and what was accomplished in the settlement is "only a portion of a single layer."
The police reforms secured in the settlement were meant to "engage police officers within the community, not just when they're dispatched," Baker said.
Those changes include:
Early action warning system to identify officers with red flags.
Mandatory commanding officer review of all search warrants.
Mandatory body camera counting from two officers of all currency seizures.
Mandatory written approval of SWAT matrices before search warrants are executed.
Encouraging officers to perform at least two paid hours a week of community service in the communities they serve.
Housing credits for officers to live in certain low-income census tracts in the city.
Hiring a team of social workers to assist with dispatched runs.
Commitment to bargain for increased drug and alcohol testing in the next FOP contract.
Overhaul of processes for simultaneous search warrants.
Mandatory EMS/paramedic presence for all search warrants.
Elimination of the "closed by exception" basis for closing investigations into officer conduct when there is a retirement or resignation.
Personnel files: Metro will negotiate with the FOP in 2021 to expand on the records it may maintain in police officers' personnel files.
The events that took Breonna Taylor's life By now, the events that ended Taylor's life have been well documented.
Taylor, 26, was shot and killed after Louisville Metro Police officers broke down her apartment door March 13 to serve a signed "no-knock" search warrant in connection with a narcotics investigation centered 10 miles away.
Police say they knocked and announced their presence, but Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, said he and Taylor didn't know who was pounding on the door.
When police battered in the door, Walker fired what he later called a warning shot. Police say it struck Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh.
Mattingly and two other officers — detectives Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove — returned fire. Taylor was hit five times and died in her hallway.
Hankison has been fired, while Cosgrove and Mattingly remain on administrative reassignment.
Will the settlement be 'a turning point?' The Taylor suit itself was settled without a single deposition or other fact-finding, which Louisville civil rights attorney Garry Adams described as extraordinary.
Many wrongful death cases take years to litigate. Adams attributed the speedy resolution of this one to "the public pressure to accept responsibility."
The Taylor family's civil lawsuit, filed April 27, alleged Taylor's life was wrongfully taken, that police used excessive force and that the search was grossly negligent.
An amended complaint filed about two months later additionally claimed Taylor's death was the result of Louisville police's effort to clear out a block for gentrification and the newly formed Place-Based Investigations unit consisted of "rogue police" who violated "all levels of policy, protocol and policing standards."
City officials vehemently denied the accusations that gentrification played any role in the narcotics investigation.
Taylor's family alleged in the suit the warrant served at Taylor's apartment was targeted at Jamarcus Glover, a convicted drug dealer who had been located by police at a drug house 10 miles away before the warrant was served on Taylor's residence.
A warrant listed Taylor's name and address, but the main narcotics investigation was centered around Glover and co-defendants' alleged trafficking on Elliott Avenue in Louisville's Russell neighborhood.
Sam Aguiar, an attorney for Taylor's family, said the city's handling of the case has been slow and frustrating.
But, Aguiar said, he hopes Metro Government's willingness to discuss significant police reforms is "a turning point."
Palmer, Taylor's mother, made it clear that this is not the end.
"As significant as today is, it's only the beginning of getting full justice for Breonna. We must not lose focus on what the real drive is," she said. "And with that being said, it's time to move forward with the criminal charges, because she deserves that and much more.
"Her beautiful spirit and personality is working through all of us on the ground, so please continue to say her name: Breonna Taylor."
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
More inside
Mayor Fischer, attorneys, Taylor's family react. 6A
What's known so far about the agreement with the family. 9A
Payout among largest ever in U.S. for police cases. 10A
Attorney Ben Crump holds the hand of Tamika Palmer, mother of Breonna Taylor, as they leave Metro Hall on Tuesday after the city of Louisville agreed to pay $12 million to Taylor's estate. At Palmer's left is attorney Lonita Baker, who also represents Taylor's family.
photos by Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Mike O'Connell, Jefferson County attorney: "Breonna Taylor's life matters. Breonna Taylor's life continues to matter, as you can see here today. I've thought about Breonna's mother, Ms. Palmer, throughout everything that has led up to today. The hole in my heart of losing a child as well is the greatest grief I've ever known in my life, and nothing can fill that hole."
$$$
