Why LMPD decided to crack down on protesters
Costello, Darcy
11 Aug 2020
The decision to crack down on protesters stemmed largely from an escalation in public confrontations and "shouldn't have been a surprise," Louisville's top public safety official says.
Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess said in an interview Monday with The Courier Journal that police have been meeting with protesters to find "common ground" around rules of engagement — and that officials have been clear in recent weeks that blocking intersections and impeding traffic won't be tolerated.
"It shouldn't have been a surprise that we were going to say, 'Look, we've been saying that you can't do this,' and to make it more vocal," said Hess, who added that protesters were told in advance that police would be making the announcement.
LMPD said Sunday that after more than 70 consecutive nights of downtown demonstrations, it no longer would allow protests to block public streets and that gatherings would be confined to sidewalks.
That didn't stop a march Sunday evening of roughly 150 people, some of whom told The Courier Journal that the issues being protested were worth the risk of arrest. It resulted in two arrests and six citations, police said late Sunday.
Protesters said Sunday that the crackdown was an "intimidation factor" meant to silence calls for racial justice, adding that the goal of the demonstrations was to "disrupt just as much as (police) disrupt people's lives."
Nightly demonstrations have gone on for 75 days in Louisville with protesters demanding action in the wake of the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor on March 13 by officers executing a no-knock search warrant.
Police opened fire in her apartment after Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired one shot, striking Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly. Walker said he thought intruders were breaking in.
"We ain't stopping," Montez Jones, a local entertainer often present at protests, said Sunday. "We're marching tonight, and we're ready for anything to come our way."
Asked what prompted the enforcement shift, Mayor Greg Fischer said Monday that there's "never a bad time to increase the focus on safety."
"We're just concerned about where all this can lead," Fischer said. "And whether it's protesters trapping a car on a road, and then somebody inside of the car gets frightened and there's no telling what their response will be, or going through Fourth Street Live and raising havoc in there while people are dining — we can't have that.
"We've got to have some orderliness to the city so regular citizens can go about their day-to-day activity. And you can still protest while you're doing that, but you can do so peacefully."
Officials cite 'aggressive behavior' but protesters disagree Hess and police officials have cited increasingly "aggressive behavior" as the impetus for Sunday's announcement.
In one incident captured on video, a protester kicked a truck during a caravan Saturday night.
People at the scene and speakers from the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression said the driver instigated the conflict, but Hess said Monday that it was indicative of increasing confrontations between protesters and the public, with some people becoming "overly confrontational."
On Saturday, protesters marched through the Fourth Street Live entertainment district, where some flipped tables and overturned chairs, leading to 12 arrests. Several patrons feared for their safety, Hess said.
"That escalation was just sort of a culmination of things that have happened in the past week," Hess said.
Police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay added Monday that LMPD has heard concerns from the public about the safety of the caravans and has been asked to provide more clarity on how the department is managing the protests.
"In an effort to be more clear about our actions, we communicated with protesters individually and more broadly through the media to outline our intent to more regularly and consistently enforce the law," Halladay said.
She said the enforcement decision had nothing to do with national group Until Freedom announcing it would set up home base in Louisville to continue protests.
In a statement, Until Freedom said LMPD needs to prepare for some "good trouble," in the spirit of the late Congressman John Lewis.
"We want to remind LMPD that there is a constitution, and the people of Louisville have ever right to protest whenever they feel like it," the statement said. "It's called democracy."
Is the change legal? The American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky said Sunday that it had "serious concerns" about LMPD's policy change and planned to closely monitor developments.
Others have questioned whether the crackdown is legal, with attorney David Mour planning to file a motion seeking an injunction to block enforcement.
Mour said the restrictions are unlawful because state law only allows pedestrians to be charged with obstructing a roadway if they make a street impassable.
"If you are not blocking the entire roadway, police cannot order your dispersal," he said.
Another attorney, Ted Shouse, who is not involved in the case, said the policy is "clearly illegal," noting that the law's authors said in 1974 it was designed to "preserve the rights of free assembly."
City officials have since clarified that the protesters aren't prohibited from marching or protesting, but they are being asked to vacate the street to let traffic pass.
According to Fischer, who said Monday that the change underwent a legal review, "impassability" is the key issue.
"When protesters make a street or thoroughfare impassable, that's when it becomes problematic," he said. "You can be on the sidewalk. You can be on one lane of the street, as long as traffic passes."
He said the announcement was "defining what's permissible" to avoid unnecessary interaction between police and protesters, adding it was "all about safety and clear communication."
Mour said his clients have no objection to safety regulations but the vehicle caravans are essential to blocking cross traffic when protesters on foot cross intersections.
He said his proposed injunction will try to block the department from banning them.
Setting 'rules of engagement' The Louisville FOP chapter presenting LMPD officers has called for more enforcement action for months, said River City Lodge 614 President Ryan Nichols.
And some Louisville Metro Council members have called for Fischer's administration to set "rules of engagement" so that the public, protesters and police would be clear on the ground rules.
A letter sent by nine bipartisan council members demanded that Fischer create a list of expectations for protesters and enforce the laws because they were growing "increasingly concerned about the lack of enforcement of ordinances and statutes designed to protect our community."
Neither group appeared to have received advance notice about LMPD's planned change.
"I'm not sure what drove (Fischer) to do it, but we do agree with enforcing the law," Nichols said. "It's more difficult at this time, when you allow things to proceed for so long and then, at an arbitrary time, say we're not going to allow it anymore."
Council President David James, D-6th, who didn't sign the letter, said Monday that he had been asking administration officials for months to share publicly the rules for protests so there would be no confusion and residents could feel safe.
The mayor's approach so far has been "very confusing" and left people scared that their government has lost control, James said.
He said Monday that he did have "concerns" about the rules Fischer laid out but that he was pleased the mayor had taken the step of laying out how laws would be enforced moving forward.
He also said a combination of factors had forced Fischer's hand, including "extreme frustration" from citizens, with fear mounting because of a lack of leadership; groups from out of town planning to protest in Louisville; and confusion between police and protesters about ground rules.
Hess, asked why the rules of engagement hadn't been made public before Sunday, said ongoing discussions hadn't reached "total agreement" on the terms.
Courier Journal reporter Andrew Wolfson contributed to this report. Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/darcyc.
Imani Smith leads a group of protesters from the Ali Center to Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville on Sunday.
$$$
