Group to 'occupy Kentucky,' await justice
Loosemore, Bailey 
05 Aug 2020
A national social justice organization that recently led a protest outside Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's home plans to return to the state permanently until justice is received for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed by Louisville police.
In an Instagram post, Until Freedom announced late Monday that it plans to "occupy Kentucky" and that followers should "stay tuned for major actions, community service & trainings."
Co-founder Angelo Pinto said Tuesday that the group's first event upon its return to Louisville will be a rally Saturday marking the six-year anniversary since Michael Brown, a Black teenager, was shot and killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Missouri — an incident that sparked the Black Lives Matter movement.
The rally, which will be called "From Michael Brown to Breonna Taylor," is expected to take place near downtown.
"Our main goal is to convey to Daniel Cameron and all the parties involved that we take this seriously," Pinto told The Courier Journal by phone. "This isn't just a one-time event or action. This will be a long-term strategy until we're able to procure justice and accountability. We believe in it that much."
Members of Until Freedom already have visited Kentucky at least four times in recent months to call attention to Taylor's case, which they say is pivotal to the national movement against police brutality.
In June, the organization orchestrated a #JusticeForBreonnaTaylor rally in Frankfort that drew more than 500 people.
And on July 14, the group led a demonstration at Cameron's home in east Louisville at which 87 protesters were arrested and charged with intimidating a participant in a legal process, a Class D felony. The felony charges have since been dropped.
At the July demonstration, Until Freedom co-founder Linda Sarsour said the national group's goal is to amplify local community organizers' demands and to "inject some resources, inject some energy and momentum into the work that has already been happening here in the Louisville area."
"We also bring relationships on a national level and influencers that can help amplify the demands of the local community," Sarsour said. "... Because we believe it is their responsibility to use the platforms that they have been given to amplify Breonna Taylor and amplify the work that is happening here in Louisville."
At both the Frankfort rally and the demonstration at Cameron's home, celebrities were present, including hip-hop star Common and Houston Texans wide receiver Kenny Stills.
Pinto said Tuesday that Black women who are killed at the hands of police often do not receive the same kind of "consistent energy" that other cases do. And Until Freedom hopes to "continue to have a consistent drumbeat and pressure on those in power who make a difference."
Pinto said Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, and her attorneys support the group returning to Louisville to fight for justice for the 26-year-old ER technician who was shot by police inside her south Louisville apartment in March. And members of Until Freedom are encouraging people from across the country to join them so that they can "build consistent momentum that continues to lay pressure on Kentucky and Daniel Cameron, specifically."
"We're looking forward to a sustained and strong effort," Pinto said.
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore atbloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/baileyl.
Protesters raise their fists outside the home of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron on July 14 in the City of Graymoor-Devondale. Around 200 people — organized by the group Until Freedom — marched from Ballard High School up Herr Lane to Cameron's neighborhood, chanting Taylor's name as well as calling for justice.
$$$
