In his first TV ad, Booker targets McGrath
Kobin, Billy
10 June 2020
With Kentucky's June 23 primary quickly approaching, U.S. Senate candidate Charles Booker's campaign on Tuesday launched its first television in an effort to capitalize off of the momentum the Louisville Democrat has recently enjoyed.
The new spot — titled "Fighting for Real Change" — takes aim at one of Booker's rivals in the Senate primary, Amy McGrath, who has enjoyed front-runner status due to her name recognition and impressive fundraising totals.
"I'm running for U.S. Senate because, in this crisis, Kentucky needs a real Democrat to take on Mitch McConnell," Booker says to open the new ad. "Someone who will fight to guarantee health care and living wages for all, and not help Trump just get his way."
Booker's 30-second TV spot includes footage of McGrath's July 2019 appearance on MSNBC, when she announced her candidacy and said that "the things that Kentuckians voted for Trump for are not being done. He's not able to get it done because of Senator McConnell."
Right off the bat, McGrath's apparent embrace of some of Trump's policies drew the ire of various progressive voters desperate for a candidate to finally unseat McConnell, the powerful Senate majority leader.
Booker, along with fellow candidate Mike Broihier, has sought to appeal to those more progressive Democrats who are not sold on McGrath.
A 35-year-old native of Louisville's West End who serves in the Kentucky House of Representatives, Booker is also shown in the new ad speaking to a crowd at one of the recent downtown Louisville protests over the death of Breonna Taylor and other black Americans at the hands of police.
Booker's recent public appearances have coincided with positive developments and greater recognition for his campaign.
One example of the fresh momentum came Sunday night, when Kentucky Sports Radio host Matt Jones endorsed Booker.
Jones, who had previously considered jumping in the Senate race against McConnell, cited the "leadership role" Booker has taken on in the past few weeks as a reason why he plans to vote for the young lawmaker, along with Booker's support for workers' rights and "Medicare for All."
Booker's campaign said it also raised nearly $700,000 in the first eight days of June and that the new ad will air for one week on a $400,000 budget.
"There's a groundswell building in Kentucky. Charles has the ability to unite Kentuckians from all backgrounds, and this ad will help show voters that he is clearly the best candidate to defeat Mitch McConnell," Colin Lauderdale, Booker's campaign manager, said in a news release. "This is the only campaign with the energy and the vision to speak directly to the issues Kentuckians face and cut across the geographic, racial, and economic divides that Mitch McConnell relies on to win."
Booker's new ad closes with various shots of Democrats, including former President Barack Obama and Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear, and the faces of a diverse mix of voters.
"I'm Charles Booker, and I approve this message, because Democrats only win by mobilizing young and old, black, brown and white, fighting for real change," Booker says. "And together, that's exactly what we'll do."
Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Kentucky U.S. Senate hopeful Charles Booker stirs the crowd with his speech for justice and reform on the steps of Metro Hall last week. Booker is challenging Amy McGrath in the June 23 primary.
$$$
