UGLY ACCUSATIONS
Watkins, Morgan
15 Aug 2020
One campaign ad shows protesters throwing fireworks in crowded streets and damaging buildings, even as monthslong demonstrations against racism persist in Louisville and across the country. The other suggests their political opponent is soft on China, as the coronavirus that first emerged in that country, and which President Donald Trump controversially calls "the Chinese virus," ravages the U.S. Both ads were released on TV — the first by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and the second by his Democratic opponent, Amy McGrath — to tilt public opinion in Kentucky's closely watched U.S. Senate race. And both, experts say, exploit racial stereotypes and undertones that are derogative toward people of color in an attempt to lure red-state voters.
"I think both of these kinds of messages sort of are on the borderline of, like, what's racist and what's not," said Kyle Kondik, who analyzes elections at the University of Virginia Center for Politics.
"And I think what you're seeing here is you've got a Democrat and a Republican who are trying to appeal to a largely white electorate on certain kinds of culturally conservative grounds."
Candidates deny racial motivation Each campaign is calling out the other for its ads.
McConnell's campaign slammed McGrath's ad Friday as a racist attack on his wife, U.S. Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao.
Asian American studies professor Russell Jeung of San Francisco State University said a different aspect of McGrath's ad — its statement that China "didn't stop the coronavirus" — is problematic as Asian Americans find themselves scapegoated for the pandemic.
"Asian Americans' status is conditional, so in times of war, in times of epidemic and in times of economic downturns, you see spikes in racist attacks on Asian Americans," he said. "And because we're easily scapegoated as the outsider, as the other, we're used as pawns in politicians' rhetoric."
As for McConnell, Kondik said there's a long history of Republican politicians criticizing protesters, using "law and order" messaging. He points to former President Richard Nixon and his 1968 presidential campaign designed to play into the fears of white voters.
Trump similarly trumpets his embrace of "law and order" politics as protests reverberate across U.S. cities, Kondik said.
"McConnell is doing what the president's doing, and that is trying to basically say that the Democrats are the party of chaos and rioters," he said. "And there's also a longstanding racial element with that sort of attack ..."
Kate Cooksey, a spokeswoman for McConnell's campaign, indicated the senator's ad was critical of violent tactics, not peaceful protesters.
"Peaceful demonstrations against racial injustice don't deserve blame for the mob violence burning American cities," Cooksey said.
McGrath's campaign, meanwhile, has said she does not condone property destruction or violence and that the China-centric ad is fact-based, including its statement that China failed to stop the coronavirus.
"There is a broad consensus among U.S. intel agencies and senators from both parties that China covering up the extent of the infection rates resulted in failing to stop COVID-19 from becoming a full-blown pandemic," McGrath spokesman Terry Sebastian said.
Here's a closer look at the campaigns' protest- and China-centric ads and how they connect to issues of race and discrimination:
Protests against racism vs. law and order This round of attack ads began with one McConnell's campaign released in early August criticizing McGrath for calling recent protesting in Portland "peaceful."
"Does this look like a peaceful protest to you?" McConnell asks in the ad as images depict protesters setting off fireworks around law enforcement officers. "Vandalism, assault — and worse?"
"I believe we have a duty to protect Americans from the violence that's devastating our communities," he says, as graphics about gun violence appear onscreen. "It starts with having the courage to say: 'This isn't a peaceful protest. It's a violent attempt to destroy our communities.'"
Widespread, ongoing protests against racism and police brutality began in May, including in Louisville, where local police officers' fatal shooting of 26-year-old Breonna Taylor, a Black woman, in March has sparked local and national outcry.
Shawnte West, an affiliate of Black Lives Matter Louisville, said she saw the McConnell ad — as well as an earlier one his campaign released that criticized "mobs" for tearing down statues of America's Founding Fathers — as an attempt to negatively depict nationwide protests against racism.
"There's a number of ways that people protest. He just chose to focus on the most violent ones," West said. "It's a scare tactic."
The protests in Portland intensified last month when Trump sent in federal law enforcement agents after he said local officials had failed to protect federal property.
The demonstrations included thousands of peaceful participants, but it also included protesters who threw fireworks at officers and vandalized buildings, according to news reports.
Federal agents likewise used aggressive tactics against protesters, injuring individuals and pulling people into unmarked vehicles.
McConnell has expressed concern in speeches on the Senate floor about the racial discrimination people across the country are protesting.
"The killings of Black Americans such as Breonna Taylor and George Floyd have rightly accelerated the national conversation on policing and racial justice," he said in June. "We need to be a country where communities of color feel confident that the police are there to safeguard their rights to equal justice and equal protection under law, and not to infringe on those rights."
But West said she sees McConnell's recent ads as part of a narrative by conservatives that aims to "paint all protesters as violent so that America no longer is standing with us for our calls for racial justice."
The message she took from McConnell's ads was: "They're coming for your neighborhood, too."
As for McGrath, her campaign noted that she has said protests "should always be peaceful" and said McConnell's ad misrepresented her comments.
Louisiana State University political communication professor Kathleen Searles said many politicians historically have used ads that focus on crime to trigger an implicit bias among voters that associates crime with people of color.
McConnell's ad seems to fit that playbook, she said. And the back-and-forth attack ads between McConnell and McGrath represent an enduring strategy.
"There's scholarly consensus on this idea that universally people say they hate attack ads, but they work," she said. "There's an arms race with it."
Anti-China rhetoric in the age of COVID-19 After that McConnell ad, McGrath's campaign hit back with its television ad taking aim at his approach to China.
"His trade deals made China richer, their military stronger," the ad says. "They're spying on us and they didn't stop the coronavirus. Oh, and Mitch made millions from China."
That last claim was deemed "grossly misleading" by The Washington Post and condemned by McConnell's campaign as a racist attack on Chao, the senator's wife, who immigrated to America from Taiwan decades ago.
McConnell's net worth gradually rose after marrying into Chao's wealthy family. The couple received a gift worth millions of dollars from Chao's father in 2008 in memory of her mother's death.
McGrath's campaign has pushed back by pointing out that Chao's father founded and has led Foremost Group, a New York-based shipping company that — as The New York Times reported last year — does significant business in China. (Chao's sister now serves as CEO and chairperson.)
But neither Chao nor McConnell is affiliated with or has a financial stake in the company, based on publicly available information and financial disclosure forms.
McConnell doubled down with a new ad Friday that slams McGrath's ad as racist and declares "nobody is tougher on China than Mitch."
In an accompanying statement, McConnell said of McGrath's ad: "Elaine and I have suffered no shortage of racially tinged political attacks since we've been married, but this ad is probably the worst."
Sebastian, McGrath's spokesman, countered: "No one believes in the American Dream and fighting so that everyone — every woman, every person of color, from every background — has a seat at the table more than Amy McGrath. ... But the facts are the facts. Millions came to McConnell and his wife in recent years from a company whose business was powered by Chinese trade."
History professor Ellen Wu of Indiana University Bloomington said there are examples of both political parties invoking longstanding and more recent fears about China on issues such as the global economy and COVID-19.
"It kind of trips certain wires in Americans' thinking, Americans' worries," she said. "Those worries obviously are very real. We have a real global pandemic — we're living with that.
"But I do think that many Asian Americans worry, and I think rightly so, that ... Asian Americans may end up being at the receiving end of some of those fears and anxieties. And that's been happening."
Jeung said both political parties are using China as a boogeyman to cater to voters, and that has consequences for Asian Americans.
He stressed that it's important to balance criticisms of China's authoritarian government with statements of support for Chinese and Asian American people, and to decouple references to the coronavirus from associations with China.
"The U.S. is probably a greater source of the spread now than China, right?" he pointed out.
America has over 5 million confirmed coronavirus cases — more than any other country.
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Coming Sunday
From apartheid to affirmative action: Mitch McConnell's complicated history on race
A still image pulled from a Mitch McConnell campaign ad.
Courier Journal
A still image pulled from an Amy McGrath campaign ad.
Courier Journal
U.S. Senate candidate Amy McGrath meets with community members at a Salvation Army on 28th Street in Louisville on Aug. 1.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., shown in February.
J. Scott Applewhite, AP
$$$
