Arrest citation details charges against suspect in LMPD shooting
Aulbach, Lucas 
25 Sep 2020
"Moving forward as a city obviously requires that we listen to each other, we respect the diff-erences that we have, but we work toward a better future that we can own together."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer
A Louisville Metro Police Department major and a Second Division officer are recovering after being shot amid Wednesday night's protests in downtown Louisville, and the man accused of firing the gun is in custody.
Larynzo Johnson, 26, was arrested at 8:40 p.m. Wednesday, according to his citation, which stated he would face multiple charges of first-degree assault of a police officer and first-degree wanton endangerment. LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said Thursday that the suspect will be charged with two counts of assault and 14 counts of wanton endangerment, "all directed against police officers." He's set to be arraigned Friday morning.
Johnson is accused of shooting two LMPD officers about 8:30 p.m. Wednesday, as protests continued across the city in the aftermath of the announcement that just one of the three officers who fired their weapons the night Breonna Taylor was killed would face charges.
Maj. Aubrey Gregory and Robinson Desroches, a Second Division officer who's been with LMPD for a year and a half, were injured, as Gregory was hit in his hip and Desroches was struck below his abdomen. Desroches was in stable condition after surgery and will recover, Schroeder said, while Gregory – the commander of LMPD's Special Operations Division and "the bedrock of (LMPD's) protest efforts" – was released from the hospital hours after the shooting.
Gregory walked into an LMPD roll call meeting on Thursday, according to a video shared by Metro Councilman Anthony Piagentini, to a round of applause from colleagues.
"Last night's situation could have been so much worse for our officers and for the people who were protesting when the gunfire rang out," Schroeder said. "... We are extremely fortunate these two officers will recover."
Johnson's arrest citation, provided by the office of the Jefferson County Circuit Court clerk, said the suspect's actions "showed an extreme indifference to the value of human life" and put officers at the scene in danger of death or serious injury.
The citation said LMPD officers were responding to a large crowd at Broadway and Brook Street in downtown Louisville that had set fires and would not disperse after being warned. Johnson was among the crowd and "intentionally used a handgun to fire multiple bullets at officers. Two officers with LMPD were struck by the bullets causing serious physical injury."
Witnesses identified him as firing the gun and then running from the scene, the citation states, and he was in possession of a handgun when he was detained. Footage reviewed by LMPD officers, according to the citation, showed him firing the weapon, and a National Integrated Ballistic Information Network examiner was looking into an association between the firearm and shell casings recovered from the scene.
"There is a high probability that a microscopic comparison, by a firearms examiner, will confirm the association between the firearm's ballistic evidence," the citation from the arresting officer states.
One Facebook Live video taken at the time of the shooting by someone in the crowd appears to show a man in a multicolored hooded sweatshirt firing a handgun at a group of officers. A man was taken into custody wearing a shirt that appeared to match that description.
Johnson's record shows no previous arrests for violent crimes or felony convictions. His address on the arrest citation listed no home address but "CAL," meaning city at large. Schroeder had little to say about the suspect's background or potential motives on Thursday, citing an ongoing investigation.
Robinson is a newer name in the department. A Louisville native who once played defensive end for Kentucky Wesleyan University's Division II football team, the Butler High School graduate joined LMPD in March of 2019, Schroeder said.
Gregory, meanwhile, is one of the more high-profile faces on the force. He joined LMPD in 1999 and previously served as commander of the Fifth Division. He worked in special events, as well, making headlines five years ago by helping a struggling woman cross the finish line during Louisville's annual Rodes City Run.
He's played a critical role for the city police department since the night the protests began nearly four months ago.
In testimony before the Louisville Metro Council last week, Gregory said he was the one who called all LMPD officers downtown on May 28, the night the protests began, as he said police had been surrounded at the base of the Second Street Bridge. It was also his decision to use tear gas against protesters that night, Gregory said, in an effort to get to victims after seven people were injured in a shooting.
Lt. Col. Josh Judah will take on Gregory's duties as the major recovers, according to Schroeder.
Schroeder described the tense situation as "very serious" Wednesday night as he spoke with reporters in a press briefing that was broken up after just minutes.
"I am very concerned about the safety of our officers," Schroeder said at the time. "Obviously we've had two officers shot tonight, and that is very serious. ... I think the safety of our officers and the community we serve is of the utmost importance."
Louisville is under a 9 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. curfew that is set to last into Monday morning. Members of the Kentucky National Guard were still in Louisville on Thursday, and barricades were still up in the streets around more than 25 blocks downtown. After 127 arrests a night earlier, protesters were back Thursday at Jefferson Square Park.
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer joined Schroeder at the podium Thursday. He thanked officers who had been in the streets the night before and asked for protesters who planned to return to the streets this week to "please do so in the daylight hours — come out, be peaceful, be heard."
"Moving forward as a city obviously requires that we listen to each other, we respect the differences that we have, but we work toward a better future that we can own together," Fischer said.
Reporter Darcy Costello contributed to this report. Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
More inside
Was AG Cameron right that he couldn't reveal Breonna Taylor recommendation to grand jury? 3A
How did local businesses react to night of protests in wake of Taylor decision? 3A
Attorney says he only wanted mother in Frankfort if there were indictments against the officers. 3A
What Louisville officials are saying after two officers were shot in the city. 11A
"Moving forward as a city obviously requires that we listen to each other, we respect the diff-erences that we have, but we work toward a better future that we can own together."
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer
Larynzo Johnson is arrested near the intersection of South First Street and East Broadway on Wednesday in downtown Louisville.
Police arrest Johnson on Wednesday in downtown Louisville.
$$$
