McConnell touts virus relief efforts at food bank visit
Watkins, Morgan
07 July 2020 
"We had hoped we'd be on the way to saying goodbye to this health care pandemic. Clearly, it is not over."
Mitch McConnell
Senate majority leader
A car alarm blared shortly after Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell began to speak at a Louisville food bank Monday morning, damping his speech about Congress' recent efforts to provide relief to local communities during the coronavirus pandemic.
McConnell had come to Dare to Care's main warehouse on Fern Valley Road to thank the team there for the work they've done to supply people in need with meals at a time when unemployment rates have spiked to historic levels.
McConnell also was there to highlight how the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security, or CARES, Act — the largest coronavirus rescue package Congress has approved so far, and a cornerstone issue for his 2020 reelection campaign — provided federal funds that helped the food bank fulfill its mission under tough circumstances.
"Let me begin by saying this has been an extraordinary year for all of us," McConnell told a group of journalists who had gathered to cover the press conference.
He didn't get much further into his speech before the car alarm went off, interrupting his speech and making it difficult to hear him.
When the noise didn't stop right away, a couple of people closed some of the retractable warehouse doors to muffle the sound.
Someone outside yelled, "Mitch doesn't care!" before the doors shut.
McConnell resumed speaking without addressing the interruption and emphasized how the CARES Act brought about $12 billion in federal funds to Kentucky, including grant and loan money that benefited Dare to Care.
McConnell also stressed that the COVID-19 pandemic has not ended, noting the recent surges in casesin different parts of the country.
"We had hoped we'd be on the way to saying goodbye to this health care pandemic," he said. "Clearly, it is not over."
He said the most important thing people can do is wear a mask to protect themselves and others. (He wore a mask Monday, as he has at other public appearances, and only took it off when it was his turn to speak during the press conference.)
He also said he believes Congress will move forward with another coronavirus rescue package, although he stopped short of confirming that will happen for sure.
Any such legislation would originate in his office and be developed in consultation with the White House and Senate Democrats, he said Monday.
McConnell took a few questions from reporters, which largely focused on Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman and emergency room technician who was fatally shot by Louisville police in her home in March, and the ongoing protests against racism and police brutality that have emerged in Louisville and other cities around the country.
Asked if he would support a federal ban against no-knock warrants, like the one used by police when they entered Taylor's home, McConnell indicated he's open to debating that idea.
"It's certainly a discussion worth having," he said.
As the press conference ended and McConnell took off, a small group of about seven people were protesting the powerful senator outside the food bank.
One of them held a sign that declared: "Breonna was essential."
Another person said McConnell bears responsibility for the health care problems the country is facing and told reporters: "He is complicit and he does not care about us."
Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502; mwatkins@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @morganwatkins26. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
"We had hoped we'd be on the way to saying goodbye to this health care pandemic. Clearly, it is not over."
Mitch McConnell
Senate majority leader
Dare to Care Executive Director Brian Riendeau, left, gives Sen. Mitch McConnell a tour of the Dare to Care facility on Fern Valley Road on Monday.
$$$
