Trump: 'I give my regards to the family'
Morgan Watkins,
25 Sep 2020
"What we saw last night is that 99.99% of people could be doing it right, but one person who wants to do the wrong thing can mar what is otherwise a nonviolent night where people are expressing how they feel."
Gov. Andy Beshear
President Donald Trump said that he is "prepared to work together" with Gov. Andy Beshear after two Louisville police officers were shot during a night of protests over the lone indictment in the Breonna Taylor case and that he gives his regards to Taylor's family.
"I think it's a sad thing, and I give my regards to the family of Breonna," Trump told reporters Thursday afternoon. "I also think it's so sad what's happening with everything about that case, including law enforcement. So many people suffering, so many people needlessly suffering."
The president already had spoken out about the shooting that injured two Louisville Metro Police officers – and mentioned he offered federal assistance to Beshear – on Twitter on Wednesday night.
"Praying for the two police officers that were shot tonight in Louisville, Kentucky. The Federal Government stands behind you and is ready to help," Trump tweeted. "Spoke to (Gov. Andy Beshear) and we are prepared to work together, immediately upon request!"
Less than two hours later, a little after midnight on Thursday, Trump tweeted: "LAW & ORDER!"
Beshear said Thursday he has not requested federal support at this point, and he also offered details about his phone call with the president.
"The president called (and) said that it appeared that we had things under control here in Kentucky. That he thought that we were doing a good job," Beshear said during a brief phone interview Thursday with The Courier Journal. "He said that if we needed additional help to call, and I told him that I agreed ... that right now we had things under control but appreciated the offer."
Beshear indicated he and Trump did not discuss details about what kind of assistance the federal government could offer.
"We didn't talk specifically about additional help because, again, the conversation was positive about what we had in place to try to keep everyone safe to express their First Amendment rights — but to be able to do so in a safe, nonviolent way that can protect everybody," the governor said.
The Kentucky National Guard and Kentucky State Police are both on "limited deployments" in Louisville right now, Beshear said, to help keep people safe and protect critical infrastructure such as hospitals.
"What we saw last night is that 99.99% of people could be doing it right, but one person who wants to do the wrong thing can mar what is otherwise a nonviolent night where people are expressing how they feel," Beshear said of Wednesday's protests in Louisville.
"When we see white supremacy groups or militias also marching into town, it just shows that we need to make sure that we have the appropriate levels of peace officers in place to ensure that we can protect everyone and ensure that people are able to express themselves while being able to do it in a safe way," he continued.
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer also said he doesn't require federal support in the city.
"We feel like we have the resources that we need on the ground right here in Louisville," he said Thursday morning.
The two officers who were shot Wednesday night sustained non-life-threatening injuries, according to LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder. They are recovering.
Police have arrested Larynzo Johnson, 26, who has been accused of shooting both officers around 8:30 p.m. Wednesday.
Beshear said he spoke Wednesday night with one of the injured officers, "who was in good spirits."
"It appeared that he not only was going to have a full recovery but (would be able) to get home to his two kids pretty quickly," the governor said. "I think he was surrounded, by that time, with family and friends and his fellow officers. He had a lot of positivity on the call, and it was pretty special to hear."
The governor said he also spoke Wednesday night with the mother of the officer who needed surgery, and she "obviously was very concerned about her son."
Hundreds of people protested in Louisville on Wednesday – an outpouring of grief over Taylor's death and outrage over what many saw as an insufficient indictment. Protests began in the early afternoon and stretched into the night.
LMPD arrested 127 people during the demonstrations. Police said some city vehicles were damaged and some looting occurred overnight. Video footage and photos taken downtown showed multiple small fires were set in trash cans and on garbage piles.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell depicted what happened in Louisville on Wednesday night as "riots" in a speech on the Senate floor Thursday morning.
"Many Kentuckians have channeled their continuing grief and anger into a peaceful exercise of their First Amendment rights. But in Louisville last night, we saw more of the lawlessness, riots and violence that has plagued American cities too often this year," he said. "Citizens' businesses were vandalized. Fires were set in streets. And two officers of the Metro Police Department were shot and wounded while protecting public safety downtown."
McConnell is up for reelection and has run campaign ads that condemn violence and vandalism that happened during recent demonstration in cities like Portland, Oregon, although the majority of protesters in Louisville and across the country have behaved peacefully since widespread protests against racism and police brutality began in May.
"Peaceful protests honor the memory of Breonna Taylor. Peaceful protests move us toward justice. Smashing windows does not. Setting fires does not. Rioting in the streets does not," McConnell said Thursday. "I hope and expect that our governor and mayor will take every necessary step to secure the justice, peace, law and order that every Kentuckian deserves."
McConnell and Trump both have promoted law-and-order messages this summer as they each campaign for voters' support in the Nov. 3 election.
Kyle Kondik, who analyzes elections at the University of Virginia Center for Politics, recently told The Courier Journal there's a long history of GOP politicians criticizing protesters and using "law-and-order" messaging, and there's a "longstanding racial element" with that kind of approach.
McConnell emphasized in his speech Thursday, as he has in past comments, that he supports peaceful protests.
Democrat Amy McGrath, the retired Marine who's running against McConnell, said it was "unacceptable" that two officers were shot in Louisville.
"It is clearer than ever that we need change in this country – and that we have very different systems of justice for different people," she also said on Twitter on Thursday. "We must work together to change that – peacefully."
Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden also criticized the shooting of those officers during an intense night of protests in Louisville.
"Even amidst the profound grief & anger today's decision generated, violence is never & can never be the answer," Biden said in a tweet Wednesday at 11:05 p.m. "Those who engage in it must be held accountable. Jill (Biden) & I are keeping the officers shot tonight in Louisville in our prayers. We wish them both a swift & full recovery."
U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., weighed in Thursday morning on what happened.
"Kelley (Paul) and I are praying for the swift recovery of the two police officers shot last night in Louisville," he tweeted. "When will Democrat mayors around the U.S. restore order in our cities?"
More protests were anticipated in the wake of Wednesday's announcement that only one of the three officers involved in the fatal shooting of Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, has been indicted – and the charges he faces are related to firing bullets into neighboring apartments, not the shooting of Taylor herself.
Beshear said his message to people in Louisville who want to express their frustrations over Taylor's death and desire for a better world is: "The world is listening."
"There are more eyes and ears and cameras in Louisville than ever in our lifetime, and there is an opportunity to be heard. And I'd ask everybody try to find that opportunity in the safest possible way ... for instance, in their houses of worship," he said Thursday. "Given the events of last night and the fact that there are those out there that would like to turn something peaceful into something that hurts everybody, I'd ask people to stay home or to go home certainly before the (9 p.m.) curfew."
Reporter Joe Sonka contributed to this story. Reach reporter Morgan Watkins: 502-582-4502.
"What we saw last night is that 99.99% of people could be doing it right, but one person who wants to do the wrong thing can mar what is otherwise a nonviolent night where people are expressing how they feel."
Gov. Andy Beshear
President Donald Trump said he is "prepared to work together" with Gov.
Andy Beshear.
$$$
