'Mistakes' made amid protests, Hess says
Costello, Darcy
17 Sep 2020
Louisville's public safety chief said Wednesday that she has "made mistakes" during the city's 112 days of racial justice protests, including asking questions about police tactics that were at times interpreted as directives that had "consequences."
"Those things were decisions that had to be made very quickly, and without having a full appreciation of the consequences that may ensue," Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess said.
"That said ... we got better at this. We got better at communicating. We got better at being able to understand what is merely a question of curiosity, what was merely a question to better understand a situation and what was being interpreted or over-interpreted as a directive," Hess said.
The city official's long-awaited sworn testimony before the Metro Council committee investigating the city's response to protests was wide-ranging, touching on her role in overseeing Louisville Metro Police and how decisions were made in the emergency operations center.
Hess and others discussed a decision made in June by officials to send a police major, Paul Humphrey, and one other officer – without any protective gear – to respond to what they believed was a dangerous, "very large" group of protesters. Hess called that a "decision I regret."
The meeting also gave police commanders a public platform to break down decisions behind some of the most contentious moments in the months of protest:
The police response to 26th and Broadway, near where David McAtee was shot and killed by law enforcement on June 1, was in part due to intelligence suggesting people involved in a large car caravan that night were planning to regroup in the West End – intelligence that was received "almost contemporaneously" to a report of a large crowd, according to Lt. Col. Josh Judah.
The lack of police intervention when protest groups converged downtown on the day of the Kentucky Derby was because of inadequate police staffing and an emphasis on protests anticipated at Churchill Downs, Humphrey said.
Tear gas was first used at the May 28 protest to allow access to the seven shooting victims reported in front of Metro Hall, Major Aubrey Gregory said.
Destruction and looting in the first days of protest were not a result of any "stand-down" order from the mayor's office. Officers nearby were surrounded and the actions were what Judah called a highly coordinated attack.
Council members had questioned how decisions were made and who was calling the shots in several of those instances. In most, LMPD commanders were responding to developments on the ground, they said Wednesday.
The meeting also offered a chance for police to elaborate on the working conditions for officers in the city – with Humphrey describing an "effective stand-down order" created by the environment around policing.
"It's not limited to what's going on in relation to protests, right? We see it on the street. We know that officers are not taking the proactive steps that they've taken in the past, and there's a direct correlation between the environment that's created around this and the overall environment in the city, the national environment that we're existing in," he said.
Interim police Chief Robert Schroeder, who had also been subpoenaed to testify, did not answer questions. His attorney has asked a judge to reconsider an order requiring him to testify publicly.
In response, Metro Council's Government Oversight and Audit Committee voted 9-1 to authorize council attorneys to file a motion to compel his testimony. Only Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th, voted against the measure. (Councilwoman Madonna Flood, D-24th, voted present.)
The committee is investigating Mayor Greg Fischer's handling of the Breonna Taylor case, McAtee's death and the city's response to protests.
Protests began May 28 after LMPD released audio of a 911 call made by Taylor's boyfriend. That night, hundreds gathered downtown, where police responded in riot gear as several protesters attempted to overturn a prisoner transport vehicle. Shots rang out, and officers released tear gas to disperse the crowd.
The second night of protests was marked by vandalism, and officers again deployed tear gas and pepper bullets. In response to elevating violence, Fischer announced he would set a curfew and call in the Kentucky National Guard.
Guard members quickly began assisting LMPD, and shortly after midnight June 1, agents from both factions were dispatched to break up a "large" crowd at 26th Street and Broadway.
Within three minutes, McAtee was shot and killed. Police contend he fired first, which prompted two LMPD officers and two National Guard members to return fire. State officials have said the bullet that killed McAtee was fired by a guard member.
$$$
