'To us, she was everything'
Duvall, Tessa
05 July 2020
Tamika Palmer prays.
To God. To her daughter Breonna.
"Tell me if I need to give this up," she asks. "Tell me if I need to walk away."
But every day she wakes up to the same answer.
"It was something telling me, somehow she made me feel that, 'Not today. You don't give up, not today.'"
Tamika is the mother of Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old Black woman fatally shot by Louisville Metro Police in her apartment on March 13.
In the months since her death, Breonna's name has become a national rallying cry: for justice for Black women, for racial equality, for police reform.
She has been a trending topic on social media and a cause célèbre for A-listers such as Beyoncé, Oprah Winfrey and Ellen DeGeneres. Louisvillians have taken to the streets in protest over her death every night for more than a month, and legislation has been named in her honor.
And Tamika has become the reluctant public face of a movement. She is baring her private grief to the world to protect her daughter's legacy.
Since the Black Lives Matter movement came to the forefront nearly seven years ago, some activists have said the conversation has left out Black women – Sandra Bland, Atatiana Jefferson, Pamela Turner, Natasha McKenna and Aiyana Stanley-Jones – while Black men's names stay in the headlines.
Ben Crump, a Florida-based attorney who has worked on dozens of police violence cases, believes what happened to Breonna will change that.
He believes Breonna will go down in history the way Trayvon Martin did for sparking Black Lives Matter, and the way Emmett Till's death shone a light on the horrors of lynching, galvanizing the civil rights movement.
The reason these names endure, the attorney said, is because of their relentless mothers.
"That is what I see in Tamika Palmer," Crump, who is involved in Breonna's case, said. "She is so dignified and graceful in her advocacy for her daughter, Breonna Taylor, not to be marginalized and swept under the rug."
He added: "There has been an awakening now, that Black women's lives matter, too, and I think that's all because of Tamika Palmer."
Being in the public spotlight doesn't come easy for Tamika, who describes herself as an intensely private person. When she's not at her full-time job as a dialysis technician, she'd prefer to be at home.
But that's not her life now. Not since that one terrible night.
March 13: 'To us, she was everything' It was long after midnight when Tamika got the call. She was already in bed.
It was Kenny Walker, Breonna's boyfriend. He was frantic. He thought someone had shot Breonna, he told her. He wasn't sure. He couldn't see her from where he was.
He screamed her name but got no answer.
Tamika dropped her phone, and the call disconnected.
She threw on clothes and started the 2-mile drive to Breonna's apartment.
She called Kenny. She called Breonna. Neither one would answer.
Breonna's street was lined with police cars. Tamika tried to tell an officer who she was and why she was there. But the officer told her an ambulance had already taken a young woman who was hurt to the hospital.
Tamika went to the hospital and waited for hours. She was told Breonna wasn't there. A woman told her there was no record of Breonna even being on the way.
Tamika drove back to Breonna's apartment on Springfield Drive. She waited hours more until a detective asked her if Breonna had any enemies. Or, whether she and Kenny had been having problems.
Finally, 10 hours after police shot Breonna, a detective indirectly told Tamika the truth. Her daughter was still inside the apartment.
She knew what that meant.
Her first-born child was dead.
In the days and weeks that followed, Tamika felt not just the grief of losing her child, but she carried the loneliness of feeling like she was the only one fighting for answers.
She didn't understand why officers would have a search warrant for a narcotics investigation at Breonna's home. Kenny was arrested and booked for the attempted murder of a police officer.
In the news coverage that followed, Breonna was called a suspect.
And then the stories stopped. The spread of the coronavirus pandemic began to shut down the state. To Tamika, it felt like only she and her family were still thinking about Breonna.
"Like she didn't matter, you know?" Tamika said. "And to us, she was everything. This horrible thing happened to her, and ... to feel like nobody cared, not even the people who did this to her. As if it was just another day."
May 28: 'I almost didn't believe it' After police killed Breonna, Tamika felt she was losing her mind.
"To not fully know what happened to Breonna, to not see her, to not be able to talk to Kenny, to understand what happened," she said.
In mid-May, on the heels of the national outpouring over white men killing Ahmaud Arbery, a Black jogger in Georgia, Breonna's name began to gain recognition.
That's when Crump joined Tamika's civil suit against the Louisville officers who shot Breonna.
Activists and celebrities told Breonna's story to their millions of followers. Petitions gathered hundreds of thousands of signatures demanding that Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove be charged in her death.
Then, George Floyd was killed by Minneapolis police on Memorial Day. His death, caused by an officer kneeling on his neck, was caught on video for the world to see.
In cities across the nation, Americans took to the streets, including Louisville.
Sam Aguiar, one of Tamika's attorneys, had received a copy of Kenny's 911 call from the immediate aftermath of the shooting. He released it to the news media May 28.
Kenny's pleas were played over and over on social media.
"Somebody kicked in the door and shot my girlfriend," he yelled to a dispatcher.
Aguiar called it "one of the most difficult things" he's ever heard.
Hours after its release, hundreds of protesters flooded downtown. They blocked traffic and chanted.
"No justice!" they yelled. "No peace!"
One sign asked: "Who do you call when police murder?"
Tamika was at work while her family went downtown to see for themselves.
"I almost didn't believe it," she said.
For Tamika, it was the first time the community realized that maybe what the police had said – that Breonna was a suspect, that Kenny had tried to kill an officer – wasn't true.
"Once people started to learn," she said, "it just turned into this big thing."
She added: "Everybody woke up."
Tamika knew about the Black Lives Matter movement and was familiar with names like Trayvon Martin and Mike Brown, but she never followed it too closely.
Until she had to.
Tamika found herself in the unwitting club of Black mothers who've lost children to police and racial violence. Many of them have rallied around her, offering support, breathing exercises and recommendations on relaxing teas to drink.
"Don't get me wrong, I've got so many family and friends around me," she said, "but a lot of them don't know how it feels to be me right now. To have all these other mothers reach out to me is just amazing."
June 5: 'Look at the world change' What happens next blurs for Tamika.
All these new things she had to juggle – news interviews, public appearances, meetings with attorneys and elected leaders while still working two jobs – have run together in her memory.
But on June 5, what should have been Breonna's 27th birthday, Tamika had a moment of clarity.
More than a thousand people gathered downtown under the sweltering June sun to celebrate her daughter's life. They wrote her cards and sang "Happy Birthday."
"You should be here," one message on a banner read. "You sparked such a powerful movement. Let's create a new world for you."
Looking out at the crowd in Jefferson Square Park, Tamika felt supported. Nina Simone's "To Be Young, Gifted and Black" played as Tamika raised her right fist in the air.
"There are times when I look back,
"And I am haunted by my youth"
In a semicircle around her, there were hoisted fists and signs as far as she could see. Dozens of cameras locked on her face as she gazed skyward.
"I remember thinking, 'I can take a breath,'" she said. "I remember standing up there and thinking, 'Look at the world change.'"
She didn't just see it; she felt it. Breonna did that.
June 25: 'I gotta do it another day' Tamika's phone buzzed with text messages until 1 in the morning, and the calls started up again by 7. Her Pleasure Ridge Park home was buzzing with relatives well before 9.
There was a rally in Frankfort for Breonna that day, and Tamika was the one coordinating dozens of family and friends, trying to get them all to the Capitol on time.
Once on the highway, Tamika put her phone on silent, its constant notifications wearing on her nerves.
During the hourlong drive to Frankfort, Tamika talked about her daughter – not the wrenching way that she died, but who she was in life, the way only a mother knows.
Breonna loved any kind of spicy food, like chicken with hot sauce or taco salads with some kick. She was always the one who organized family cookouts and game nights.
Breonna, Tamika said, was a diva. She'd been planning a beach trip with friends, and each day Tamika's email lit up with alerts that Breonna had been on Amazon again ordering new clothes.
"'Breonna, didn't you buy new outfits for the last one?'" Tamika would ask.
"'Yeah, but I can't (wear them),'" Breonna would say. "'I took pictures in those.'"
Tamika said Kenny planned to propose to Breonna, that he finally felt ready for marriage. He was going to use his mother's ring.
"Kenny will forever be family," she said.
Before the rally, Tamika gathered with organizers at a church a few blocks away. She wasn't sure of the day's game plan but went where she was asked for the cause.
The fellowship hall was packed for a catered breakfast, distribution of T-shirts and the day's first chants of "Say her name!"
Tamika found a windowsill in the corner and sat down. She wasn't overwhelmed. She just didn't want to be in the middle of it all.
She found the time to grab a breakfast sandwich and was trying to make her way outside when one of the organizers stopped her.
Jada Pinkett Smith walked in alongside her children, Jaden and Willow, and the rapper MC Lyte.
They hugged and took photos, and when it calmed down, Tamika sneaked outside. She talked about how good Pinkett Smith looked up close, and that MC Lyte was serious about keeping her mask on.
Tamika wasn't starstruck; she's too numb for that. But she is proud to see famous people take the time to demand justice for Breonna.
Then she realized: She never got to finish breakfast. Someone had grabbed her sandwich in the middle of all the excitement, and now the rally would go straight through lunch.
Was she ready?
She sighed.
"As ready as I'll be."
But when the car rounded the corner by the Capitol, the crowd left her awestruck.
She didn't know so many people would be there.
She hadn't known that Pinkett Smith would be in Frankfort or that the hip-hop artist Common would take the stage to read an original poem about Breonna.
She gave her most impassioned remarks yet – even though she'd hoped not to speak at all.
Behind the lectern, Tamika smiled, a genuine, wide smile. She told the crowd she loved them, that they looked good, that without them, she'd still be at home crying.
"We're not done until they know that her life mattered," she said. "We not done. We goin' get justice. We got a long haul."
She laughed.
"But I ain't goin' hold y'all," she said. "It's hot. I'm tired."
When she could, Tamika slipped away from center stage and stood in the shade of the Capitol. She hoped to beat the traffic by leaving before the rally ended, but instead got held up with interviews for so long that the crowd had already dissipated by the time she could leave.
Aguiar said the Frankfort rally was the first time the world heard Tamika's true voice, in its most raw, genuine state.
"Until that day, there was still some apprehension," he said. "She was tentative. She was scared. She's just a normal human being. She's not used to talking on TV."
The rally gave Tamika that same kind of renewed feeling she had on Breonna's birthday.
"I always start off thinking how I don't want to do it," she said, "but these are the moments that make me say, 'I gotta do it another day.'"
In the beginning, Tamika couldn't wait for her ordeal to be over so she could find some kind of new routine, even it if was one without Breonna.
Now, she doesn't see that as an option.
"This is my new norm," she said. "I don't know that I could walk away now. I'm still trying to figure it out and learn how to deal with it, but I'm definitely here for the duration of it.
"Because I would hate for this to ever happen to anyone else."
The hundreds of people who had filled the Capitol lawn for the hourslong rally had left and the celebrities were long gone. Crews had begun taking down the audio equipment, and the parking lot was nearly empty.
She climbed into the backseat of the black Dodge Charger – the one that Breonna had worked two jobs to buy in January – and laughed.
"I just need a nap!" she said.
After a quick stop at a drive-thru and getting on the highway headed west toward home, Tamika tucked her purse between her shoulder and the car door and settled in.
Forty minutes later in the stop-and-go traffic of the evening commute on the outskirts of Louisville, a new song came on the radio. Tamika's breathing was steady and even, her eyes covered by her #BreonnaTaylor face mask.
"I seen what I seen,
"I guess that mean hold him down if he say he can't breathe
"It's too many mothers that's grieving
"They killing us for no reason."
The next day, she'd be at work at 4 a.m. for the one normal part of her life.
What happened to Breonna is a tragedy. But in a way, Tamika said, her daughter's legacy will live on even larger.
She always knew Breonna was destined for greatness.
Tamika will make sure of it.
Breonna Taylor and her mother, Tamika Palmer.
Courtesy Tamika Palmer
Breonna Taylor and her mother, Tamika Palmer.
Courtesy Tamika Palmer
Tamika Palmer holds up her hands as the Metro Council votes to ban no-knock warrants in honor of her daughter Breonna Taylor last month in Louisville. At right is Ben Crump, a Florida-based attorney representing Taylor's family.
$$$
