Could red flag law have stopped him?
Bullington, Jonathan
12 July 2020
They could see their grandson slipping away. They just didn't know how to pull him back.
In the weeks before Steven Lopez joined Louisville's downtown protests over the March 13 police shooting of Breonna Taylor, his grandparents said he had grown increasingly volatile.
Mercedes and Michael Arnett said their grandson showed all the symptoms of someone with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. In April, they sought a protective order against him, saying they were afraid of the young man they raised since 2, after his mother was killed in front of him.
Their worry grew exponentially when he used his federal stimulus check to buy a handgun and started going to nightly protests.
Lopez, 23, lost the gun June 17, when he was arrested with more than a dozen protesters. He had a handgun with him, his arrest citation states, and two loaded magazines.
Ten days later, on June 27, protesters and police say he pulled a gun from the holster of a man working security and fired on the crowd at Jefferson Square Park — killing 27-year-old photographer Tyler Gerth.
The slaying left two families devastated by yet another example of the dangerous confluence of untreated mental illness and easy firearms access.
"In this situation, you have grandparents who really cared and knew something was up," said Dean Walker, who lost his daughter and son to separate acts of gun violence seven months apart and now volunteers with the Kentucky chapter of the gun safety advocacy group Moms Demand Action.
"There was nowhere to go and nothing to do. We see that in too many situations."
Walker and others say the tragic events of that day highlight the need for Kentucky lawmakers to finally adopt extreme-risk protection orders, the controversial gun legislation better known as a red flag law.
"I just think a red flag law could have given (Lopez's grandparents) an interim period to have other interventions," Walker said, "to get him back on his medication and get therapy that could have helped him."
The highly divisive law has gained traction as a potential solution to mass shootings, with versions existing in 19 states and the District of Columbia.
While there's no guarantee a red flag law could have stopped Lopez or other unstable people with guns, studies have shown it has reduced self-inflicted fatal gunshot wounds over time.
Though momentum to bring a red flag law to Kentucky has stalled amid the coronavirus outbreak, gun violence is on a record pace in Louisville and firearms suicides are steadily climbing across the commonwealth, leading some to say it's time to do more to get guns out of the hands of people who are a danger to themselves and others.
Why a red flag law might save lives At their core, extreme-risk protection orders allow police and courts the option of temporarily removing firearms from someone who is in crisis and deemed to be a credible threat of harming themselves or others. Weapons can be returned on a judge's order that the person is no longer a threat.
In some states, like Indiana, the power to ask a judge to take or hold a person's firearm is restricted to law enforcement. Others expand that ability to include family, medical professionals, co-workers or even school staff, while also including penalties for filing false petitions.
Gun-safety advocates call them a needed remedy for something many Americans can agree on: getting guns out of the hands of the mentally unstable.
A poll released last August by AMP Research Lab found broad, bipartisan support for red flag laws, even among gun owners.
Proponents say that while the law is not a panacea for all acts of gun violence, it has been proven to save lives by closing existing gaps in the law that allow people in crisis — like Lopez — to buy and keep firearms.
"Here's a way to hopefully reduce gun violence through taking care of people," Walker said. "You recognize a problem and have a mechanism to temporarily protect this person and those around them."
But across the country, it's been a lightning rod for opponents who call the law an unnecessary gun grab that trample on the Second Amendment and due-process rights of otherwise law-abiding citizens.
The NRA and American Civil Libertines Union have raised concerns with red flag laws. And people like Courtney Griffieth, co-founder of a pro-Second Amendment Facebook group, point to existing federal and state laws that prohibit firearms possession by convicted felons or by people who have been involuntarily committed to a mental institution or "adjudicated as a mental defective."
"These types of people already can't have guns, so I'm failing to see precisely the dire need for a red flag law," she previously told The Courier Journal.
"Because for the most part, criminals and the mentally ill are already extremely limited, but they still are going to find ways around that. ... There's really no sure-fire way to keep guns out of the hands of people who shouldn't have them."
Red flag efforts stall in Frankfort Efforts to pass a red flag law have repeatedly stalled in Kentucky over the years.
Last legislative session, a bipartisan trio of state senators — Julie Raque Adams, R-Louisville; Paul Hornback, R-Shelbyville; and Morgan McGarvey, D-Louisville — were attached to a proposed bill that was never introduced.
The mere suggestion of the bill rankled opponents, though, who responded with rallies in Frankfort and a concerted effort by Griffieth and others to lobby all but a handful of the commonwealth's 120 counties to adopt so-called Second Amendment sanctuary resolutions.
While the law flounders in Frankfort, neighbors Indiana, Illinois and Virginia are among the states with a red flag law on the books.
Connecticut is credited as being the first, enacted in 1999 after an accountant for the state lottery stabbed and shot four supervisors before taking his own life.
Six years later, Indiana passed its version of a red flag law, named after Jake Laird, an Indianapolis police officer who was gunned down by a man in a mental health crisis.
More states adopted them after the 2018 mass shooting that killed 17 people and wounded 17 others at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida.
The 2019 mass shootings in El Paso, Texas, and Dayton, Ohio, brought another crop of proposals in several states as well as talks of a federal red flag law.
Yet, there is little research to suggest the laws are successful in disarming potential mass shooters.
There are, however, studies showing they can be useful in preventing firearms suicides, which in Kentucky account for roughly 70% of the state's 660 yearly average firearms deaths.
A 2018 study from University of Indianapolis professors looked at the country's two oldest red flag laws and found that Indiana's led to a 7.5% reduction in firearms suicides.
Connecticut's law initially led to a 1.6% drop in firearms suicides, the professors found, but resulted in a 13.7% decline eight years later when enforcement efforts picked up following the 2007 mass shooting at Virginia Tech.
Another study out of Duke University examined the laws in both states and estimated that one suicide is prevented for every 10 guns seized.
"ERPO (red flag law) gets people through an immediate crisis," said Dr. Julie Cerel, a professor with the University of Kentucky's College of Social Work and past president of the American Association of Suicidology.
"They might be suicidal again, but hopefully they have supports in place at that point to where they can get through that crisis again or they can see the value in having surrendered their firearms and might do it voluntarily again."
Pandemic stokes fears of rising firearms suicides At least half of all suicides in this country are from a self-inflicted gunshot wound, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data shows, and the number of suicides by firearm rose 30% from 2009 to 2018.
In Kentucky, firearms suicides increased 26% in the same period, claiming the lives of 4,625 people. Among bordering states, only West Virginia has a higher rate of firearms suicides.
No one knows for certain that a red flag law could have prevented Gerth's death that day in downtown Louisville; Lopez's grandparents said they would have tried to use the law if it existed.
But gun-safety advocates in Kentucky fear more lives will be lost by the state's inaction, particularly amid economic and emotional strains from the coronavirus outbreak and increased firearms ownership brought on by the pandemic.
And that's why they say Kentucky needs a red flag law.
"If you are in favor of gun rights and you are in favor of allowing people to have a gun for whatever reason they want ... then you should be able to understand helping that gun owner in their moment of crisis because that's what this is," said Whitney Austin, who founded a gun violence prevention nonprofit, Whitney/Strong, after surviving a 2018 mass shooting in Cincinnati.
"Whether it's suicide or even worse with mass violence, if we can come in and do this intervention and we can get you on a path to recovery ... you can get your gun back. It seems like a really good solution, if you think about it, for gun owners, because everybody can go into a crisis."
Information for this story was also gathered by reporter Andrew Wolfson. Jonathan Bullington is an investigative reporter. Reach him at: 502-582-4241; JBullington@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @jrbullington.
Find more inside
"No second chance": How do you prevent suicide? Start by taking away guns, some say. Metro, 3A
Coming Monday
How Indiana's red flag law is helping save lives by taking away unstable people's guns.
A young man kneels in prayer before a vigil for Tyler Gerth, a 27-year-old photographer who was shot and killed in Jefferson Square Park in Louisville on June 27.
Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Steven Lopez, right, at 18 when he was a member of the Navy ROTC in Louisville. Police have accused Lopez, 23, of taking a gun from a protester and firing shots into a crowd at Jefferson Square Park.
$$$
