Louisville youths march 'for freedom'
Loosemore, Bailey 
05 July 2020
As people across Louisville celebrated the Fourth of July, several youth spent Saturday leading a history lesson through downtown.
Dubbed the Youth March for Freedom, the demonstration drew more than 100 people, who walked through 95-degree heat to reclaim the city's historical civil rights sites and to call for Black liberation from racial injustices they say have continued to exist well after America declared its independence.
"We chose to have this march on this day because we can't miss the opportunity to declare the same thing for ourselves that, you know, they did over 200 years ago," said Imani Smith, 19, who helped organize the event.
"You can't say that we are a perfect union, you can't say we are this perfect country when you have all these people who are dying at the hands of the institutions that protect it. So we're calling on America to be that perfect union and to listen to Black stories, listen to Black lives and to fight for what we're saying."
The march followed more than 30 days of local protests against police brutality in the wake of the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was killed by police in her south Louisville apartment.
And it included stops at several downtown locations, where speakers gave short lessons on the people and moments that have contributed to Louisville's fights for civil rights.
At the Belvedere, Courier Journal columnist and activist Quintez Brown told the story of York, a Black slave who was part of the Lewis and Clark expedition and who is now memorialized in a statue made by sculptor Ed Hamilton.
At Roots 101 African American museum on Main Street, founder Lamont Collins displayed chains and a neck hook that were used to capture and keep people in slavery.
"Here, we're giving you all a place to tell our story, that the American story is Black history," Jacy Jones-Britt, community engagement director for Roots 101, said of the museum.
At the corner of Fourth Street and Muhammad Ali Boulevard, a march organizer told the story of a sit-in at the former Stewart's department store during the desegregation movement of the 1960s.
"Instead of staying quiet while people from all across the globe were being oppressed, people of Louisville staged sit-ins here for months," the organizer Alissa Vance, said.
"It was organized by Central High School students, It was the young people."
A participant in the Youth March for Freedom had face paint to represent her west African heritage.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Louisville Metro Council member Keisha Dorsey looks on from under a yellow umbrella on Saturday.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
A motorist acting as support for the Youth March for Freedom looks on near Jefferson Square Park on Saturday.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
Around 100 protesters marched Saturday. At Roots 101 African American museum on Main Street, founder Lamont Collins displayed chains and a neck hook that were used to capture and keep people in slavery.
$$$
