A MOTHER'S fury
Duvall, Tessa
26 Sep 2020
Breonna Taylor's mother didn't say a word Friday morning, but the world still heard her anguish.
Embraced by her youngest daughter and surrounded by family in a downtown gathering point protesters call Injustice Square Park, Tamika Palmer let her sister say what she couldn't.
"I was reassured Wednesday of why I have no faith in the legal system and the police and the law that are not made to protect us Black and brown people," Bianca Austin read from a statement on Palmer's behalf. "But when I speak on it, I'm considered an angry Black woman.
"But know this – I am an angry Black woman," Austin read, wearing her late niece's EMT jacket. "I am not angry for the reasons that you would like me to be, but angry because our Black women keep dying at the hands of police officers."
For more than an hour Friday, Taylor's family, attorneys and supporters held court in the center of Jefferson Square Park, the heart of the 121-day-long protest movement in downtown Louisville.
Behind them stood a larger-than-life mural of Taylor smiling over them.
After more than six months of waiting, Taylor's family and the world learned Wednesday that no Louisville officers would face charges for the 26-year-old Black woman's death. She was killed when police tried to serve a no-knock search warrant at her apartment.
Her boyfriend fired a shot, striking an officer, but later said he didn't know it was police at the door. Police returned fire, killing Taylor in her hallway.
The grand jury decision announced by Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron Wednesday was bitterly disappointing to Palmer and the rest of the Taylor family.
In the months since Taylor's death, "arrest the cops who killed Breonna Taylor" became a call to action, a slogan, a T-shirt design and a social media meme.
When it became evident that no officers were charged for her death, protests began anew across America, with thousands of people taking to the streets in Chicago, Milwaukee, Seattle, Washington, D.C., and elsewhere to say Taylor's name.
In Louisville, protesters cried in the streets at the news of the grand jury's decision, then marched in anger through the night, engaging in confrontations with local and state police and National Guard. Before the next day, two Louisville officers had been shot.
But the Taylor family waited until Friday to publicly voice their discontent.
Speakers did not hold back their feelings about Cameron, with several calling him out and questioning his integrity and his ability to do his job.
Palmer's attorneys, Ben Crump, Lonita Baker and Sam Aguiar, specifically called on Cameron to release the grand jury transcript and recording to show what evidence and recommendations he presented.
"What we also want is for you to quit dodging the question. You were asked at the press conference (Wednesday): Did you make a recommendation" to the grand jury, Baker asked. "You refused to answer. Answer the question: Did you even present any charges regarding Breonna Taylor to the grand jury?"
The voters, Baker said, deserve to know. Cameron is up for reelection in 2023.
Baker also lambasted Cameron for not being "fully upfront" with Palmer on what the indictment would be, making her drive to Frankfort for a disappointing result.
Elizabeth Kuhn, a spokeswoman for Cameron, issued a statement Friday saying the attorney general "understands that the family of Ms. Breonna Taylor is in an incredible amount of pain and anguish, and he also understands that the outcome of the Grand Jury proceedings was not what they had hoped."
"Regarding today's statements at the press conference, everyone is entitled to their opinion, but prosecutors and grand jury members are bound by the facts and by the law," Kuhn wrote. "Attorney General Cameron is committed to doing everything he can to ensure the integrity of the prosecution before him and continue fulfilling his ethical obligations both as a prosecutor and as a partner in the ongoing federal investigation."
The only officer at Taylor's apartment March 13 to be indicted was Brett Hankison, who faces three counts of felony wanton endangerment for shots that went into an adjoining unit where three residents were present. LMPD fired him in June for shooting "blindly."
Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove, who fired the bullets that struck Taylor and killed her, were not charged, with Cameron saying they acted in self-defense after Walker fired at them first.
The morning's press conference came after yet another chaotic night for Louisville.
Police arrested at least two dozen protesters – including two of Louisville's most vocal Black advocates, one of whom is the only Black woman in Kentucky's legislature – Thursday night as around 100 people huddled on a nearby church's property, seeking sanctuary to avoid more arrests.
Cameron's harshest critic at Friday's press conference was Tamika Mallory, a leader for Until Freedom, a New York group helping organize protests in Louisville.
She called Cameron "wicked" and accused him of upholding white supremacy.
"Daniel Cameron is no different than the sellout negroes that sold our people into slavery," Mallory said, to the applause and cheers of supporters, "and helped white men to capture our people, to abuse them and to traffic them. ... That is who you are, Daniel Cameron. You are a coward. You are a sellout. You were used by the system to harm your own mama, your own Black mama."
Jacob Blake Sr., whose 29-year-old son was shot and seriously injured by Kenosha, Wisconsin, police, made the roughly 400-mile drive to support Taylor's family. He, too, called out Cameron, as well as the rookie attorney general's close political affiliations with Sen. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and President Donald Trump.
"Did he say her name?" he asked of the grand jury proceedings. "Did Daniel Cameron say her name?"
"No!" someone yelled from the crowd.
"Mitch's b----," another man yelled.
"And that's what he is," Blake said. "That's what he is."
Aguiar, one of the attorneys, said he has seen the investigative file and said Cameron "got so much wrong." The posting on Twitter of a segment of body camera footage Friday morning showing Mattingly after he had been shot at Taylor's apartment means all police footage should be made public, he said.
"When everybody sees what really happened, this anger and frustration and curiosity that we feel right now," Aguiar said, "it pales in comparison to what it's going to be when everything comes down."
Reporter Ben Tobin contributed to this story. Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
More inside
Protesters vow to continue. 3A
Police major relieved of duty. 3A
LMPD shooting suspect arraigned. 4A
Read Palmer's full statement. 7A
A news conference is held at Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville to refute the findings of a grand jury in the shooting death of Breonna Taylor by Louisville Metro Police officers.
$$$
