Jackson to Paul: Don't block anti-lynching bill
Miller, Alfred
08 June 2020
As protests over racial injustice continue across the world, longtime civil rights leader the Rev. Jesse Jackson sent a message in Louisville on Sunday to Sen. Rand Paul: Stop holding up federal anti-lynching legislation over technicalities.
"I respect your opinion, but the die has been cast," said Jackson, adding he's been trying to reach the Kentucky senator by phone. "We know what a lynching is."
Called the Emmett Till Antilynching Act after the 14-year-old boy who was killed in Mississippi in 1955, the bill would make lynching a federal crime. Paul, whose office did not respond to a request for comment, has sought to amend the bill.
But Paul has previously defended his opposition to a bill he believes goes too far.
"You think I'm getting any good publicity out of this? No. I will be excoriated by simple-minded people on the internet who think somehow I don't like Emmett Till or appreciate the history of Emmett Till," Paul has said. "I'll be lectured by everybody."
At issue is the bill's definition of lynching as a conspiracy to commit bodily harm in connection with a hate crime. Paul has sought to raise that bar to "serious bodily injury," so that only crimes involving conspiracy to cause "substantial risk of death and extreme physical pain" could be charged as lynching, The New York Times reported.
"Judges will know the difference between a scratch and a lynching," Jackson told reporters following an appearance with the Rev. Kevin Cosby at St. Stephen Baptist Church in Louisville's West End. "That's language that does not stand true."
Jackson's appearance was one of several events around town as part of an ongoing protest over Breonna Taylor's killing.
A prayer walk took place at Central Park that brought out at least 200 people on a sweltering Sunday afternoon. Several faiths, including Judaism, Islam and Hinduism were represented, while other religious leaders spoke and several musical performances took place.
Other protests took place in Jeffersontown and at Waterfront Park.
Meanwhile, Terry Willis — an Alabama man marching to protest the killing of George Floyd — made his way through downtown Louisville in the afternoon and spoke briefly to a crowd that had followed him to the courthouse. Willis started in Huntsville, Alabama, where he lives, and is continuing to Minneapolis, where Floyd was killed.
On Sunday, Jackson repeatedly read from a list of past Kentucky lynchings by county. Between 1877 and 1934, at least 186 African Americans were lynched in Kentucky, according to data compiled by The University of Washington.
But 2020 was the first time a lynching was televised, Jackson said, referring to the killing of George Floyd, an African American, by a white Minneapolis police officer. Video of the officer kneeling on Floyd's neck for nearly nine minutes has sparked outrage.
The footage — together with the recent slayings of Breonna Taylor in Louisville and Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia — has prompted widespread protests.
In their earliest stages, those protests took a violent turn. Jackson called for the protests to be peaceful.
"Nonviolence is strong, not weak," he said.
Slowed by the effects of Parkinson's disease, Jackson leaned on his son Sunday to articulate specific policy recommendations for Louisville.
Jonathan Jackson, a spokesman for the Rainbow/PUSH coalition, a civil rights group, said they were calling for an end to the use of no-knock warrants like the one that precipitated the March 13 police shooting of Taylor.
He also criticized the use of confidential informants like the one who pointed police in Taylor's direction.
Louisville Metro Police raided the home of Taylor, an unarmed black woman, in a search for drugs. Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired at police, thinking they were intruders, according to his attorney Rob Eggert.
One officer was struck in the leg. Officers returned fire and killed Taylor. No drugs were found.
The elder Jackson also called for the closing of the digital divide by ensuring black people have equal access to laptops and the internet.
In his sermon, Cosby, St. Stephen's senior pastor, called more explicitly for reparations to right the wrongs of slavery and discrimination.
Invoking a parable in which Jesus tells of a farmer who sows seed aimlessly, Cosby reminded worshippers that only seeds sown on good soil bear fruit.
"Give black people some of that dirt that you take for granted," Cosby said.
He closed by giving Jackson a copy of a book advocating for reparations by Duke University's William A. Darity.
Reach reporter Alfred Miller at amiller@gannett.com or 502-582-7142. Follow him on Twitter @AlfredFMiller. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
St. Stephen Baptist Church and the Rev. Kevin Cosby welcome the Rev. Jesse Jackson on Sunday morning for a talk on the root causes of social unrest.
$$$
