Man shot at protest demands answers
Kim, David J
02 June 2020
Clark had surgery to remove the bullet and was discharged Friday around 2 p.m. He believes it was the police who shot him. LMPD said after Thursday's protest that seven people were shot "by other members of the crowd" and that its officers did not fire their guns. On Friday morning, Lt. Col. LaVita Chavous said that LMPD had "no leads on the shooters."
William Clark didn't know there was a protest happening in Louisville on Thursday night. The New Albany, Indiana, resident was enjoying a night out at his friend's house in Louisville that evening. As he was leaving the house with a friend around 8:40 p.m., he saw protesters with signs, heard commotion and realized what was happening.
The 36-year-old admitted he had not heard about the Breonna Taylor incident until that night, though he knew of George Floyd's death. He gathered what happened to Taylor from the signs and speeches and decided to join in.
Outside of Louisville Metro Hall, Clark said protesters started pushing a police car and he realized things were only going to escalate.
"I was telling my friend, 'Let's go,'" Clark said. "Right as I put that conclusion in my head, I heard the first gunshot go off."
Clark immediately got down on the ground, while still thinking he needed to escape from the scene. Then, more shots were fired.
"As it went off again, I was running and I fell to my face. As I fell, I looked down at my leg and that's when I saw the blood and I knew then that I was shot," he said. "I didn't know how bad. I just know I was losing a lot of blood."
Clark was one of the seven people shot Thursday, the first of nights of protests that have been both peaceful and raucous.
He limped to one of the cars at the scene, with a bullet pierced in his left ankle, and asked a stranger for help.
"I said 'I'm dying. Could you give me a ride to the hospital? I've been shot.'"
The driver obliged and tried to leave the scene, although many protesters didn't let the car through initially. Clark said the driver, Damon Candler, had to beg them that a gunshot victim was in his backseat. They eventually let them through.
Clark was taken to University of Louisville Hospital, where he said police took his clothes to run some tests. He has not heard back from the police since, he said.
His friend, Chas Reid, who was with Clark on Thursday night, lost him once the shots were fired. Reid frantically searched for Clark through tear gas but didn't spot him.
"For him to vanish in air or where I couldn't find him, I was scared," Reid said. "I didn't know if he was alive or wounded or anything. I just immediately got worried."
Clark had surgery to remove the bullet and was discharged Friday around 2 p.m. He believes it was the police who shot him.
LMPD said after Thursday's protest that seven people were shot "by other members of the crowd" and that its officers did not fire their guns.
On Friday morning, Lt. Col. LaVita Chavous said that LMPD had "no leads on the shooters," but the department's Homicide Unit is continuing to investigate.
"I got shot directly in front of the police and I just find it hard to believe that seven to eight shots can go off right in front of the police," Clark said. "It made me believe that the way the shot came, it came from their end. I honestly believe the police did it."
Sgt. Lamont Washington said Monday "we did not fire any shots" and that it is an open investigation.
Clark has hired attorney Larry Wilder to help get some answers.
"What we want to know is what did they take from him, what kind of bullet entered his foot and how did they rule out that he wasn't shot by a Louisville Metro Police officer," Wilder said. "It seems like they haven't done an investigation and it seems like that is always scary when in this environment, the failure to investigate sometimes points to the desire to keep the real answer to the question hidden."
Wilder has requested that the hospital and Louisville Metro Police maintain all information and evidence related to the shooting, specifically body cameras. He is also determining whether any security cameras around the area might provide some view or any evidence of where the gunshot came from.
Both Wilder and Clark also wondered why the names of the other gunshot victims have not been released.
Clark said he would like to meet the people who went through his experience.
"Other set of circumstances, their names would have been immediately released to the press," Wilder said, "and the police would have been immediately asking questions about help from the community to catch the criminal that shot them."
While Wilder said he understands there's a lot going on, transparency is even more critical these days.
"If someone shot you, would you expect the police to do the investigation?" he said. "If the police came (and) took everything that was evidence of the shooting, would you expect they were doing an investigation? If you expect that they were doing an investigation, wouldn't you think they would talk to you?
"None of that happened and none of it's happened."
Clark, a technician at Electro-Tech Services in Louisville, said it will be at least six weeks before his wound is healed. His family is grateful that the injury is nothing more serious than what it is.
He's also been in touch with Candler, his "life saver." When Clark found out that he was going to "live through it" at the hospital Thursday, his first thought was Candler and his car.
"I called him and told him I'd be willing to do anything to clean and help with the backseat," Clark said. "He said, 'Don't worry about it. You just owe me friendship.'"
Given his condition, Clark will not be able to join future protests but said he will be there in spirit.
"People are protesting about the wrongdoing of the law enforcement," Clark said, "and Breonna Taylor and George Floyd are what we are bringing to light and LMPD showed no effort to deal with violence mainly because they are the problem."
Clark had surgery to remove the bullet and was discharged Friday around 2 p.m. He believes it was the police who shot him. LMPD said after Thursday's protest that seven people were shot "by other members of the crowd" and that its officers did not fire their guns. On Friday morning, Lt. Col. LaVita Chavous said that LMPD had "no leads on the shooters."
$$$
