If calls to abolish the police seem rash, think again
14 June 2020
Let's talk about the police. The murders of Breonna Taylor, David McAtee and George Floyd, in addition to sparking uprisings worldwide, are bringing on board people who were previously ambivalent toward or opposed to the #blacklivesmatter movement.
Many of you are repulsed by the behavior of police officers in Minneapolis, Louisville and elsewhere. But many are reluctant to paint police with a broad brush. You feel that our community needs police protection, and that most police officers are good people trying to do a dangerous job. You want justice for families who have lost loved ones, but calls to abolish the police seem rash and unnecessary. Better, you think, to eliminate the few bad apples, so officers can do their job effectively. If you've found yourself thinking or saying these things, this is for you.
I am a Christian who believes that all persons are made in God's image and have capacities for good and evil. I believe each human life is sacred, including police officers' lives. I would like to hold the views expressed above. Unfortunately, though, they're just not true.
While predated in the northern colonies by "night watches" meant to curb prostitution and unlawful behavior, police forces in the South developed in the 1700s as "slave patrols." Mounted on horseback, they prowled rural roads searching for escaped slaves. Apprehended fugitives routinely faced gruesome lashings and sometimes execution. The tough, simple truth: especially in the South, police forces were created to protect white people's right to own, terrorize, rape and murder Black people.
After emancipation and a failed reconstruction, Black people were relegated to a station historians describe as comparable to slavery. Many turned to sharecropping, often returning to work for their former slaveholders. Beginning in the 1880s, lynching became commonplace throughout the South. Between 1882 and 1930, nearly one Black person was lynched per week (Sims, Lynched, Baylor U Press, 58). Lynchings were often advertised in newspapers, drawing crowds of up to 20,000 — after the victim was hanged (or slowly burned to death), white onlookers would cut off the victim's genitals, fingers, toes and ears and take them as souvenirs (Cone, The Cross and the Lynching Tree, Orbis, xiv, 9). Police officers did not prevent these lynchings from taking place, but often participated, in some cases allowing lynch mobs access to jails, so they could remove someone they decided deserved to die.
In the 1960s, as many Black people grew jaded about the progress of Martin Luther King Jr.'s nonviolent movement, riots broke out, especially in Los Angeles, Detroit and elsewhere. Rioters' most common complaint was police brutality (To Make Our World Anew: A History of African Americans, v.2, Oxford U Press, 245). King himself had faced down Birmingham police commissioner Bull Connor, who unleashed dogs on protesters and ordered fire hoses blasted on children. King insisted that southern Black people "live in a police state which, paradoxically, maintains itself within a democratic republic" (A Testament of Hope, 172-3). When King was assassinated on April 4, 1968, the police who were supposed to be guarding him were absent (To Make Our World Anew, 250).
Today, protesters continue to demand exactly what they have been demanding for decades. The #blacklivesmatter movement, which took off in 2014 after the killing of Michael Brown by officer Darren Wilson in 2014, has demanded that police stop killing Black people. However, the New York Times recently reported that police killings have remained flat since the movement began, with 1,111 killed in 2013 and 1,099 in 2019. Protesters are furious because years of overwhelmingly peaceful protest have not produced meaningful change. Police officers are still killing people at the same rate. They wear body cameras, but they don't turn them on, as in the cases of Taylor and McAtee.
In 2016, the national Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Donald Trump for president. This was the FOP's first endorsement since 1996, when it backed Bill Clinton's reelection after his disastrous crime bill was passed. Meanwhile, the Louisville FOP reelected president Dave Mutchler after he wrote a letter condemning Black Lives Matter activists as "sensationalists, race-baiters and liars," blamed them for the violence in Ferguson, Missouri, and apparently called on supporters to ready an insurrection: "Soon, we may have to ask for you to rise with us against the small, but very vocal group of people in our city who resist everything we all strive to attain."
Given the views of the FOP's democratically elected leaders, it is no coincidence that Black men are 2.5 times as likely as white men to die at the hands of police, and six times as likely to be incarcerated. Approximately 40% of police families experience domestic violence, compared with 10% of the general population.
I invoke these statistics not to demonize or scapegoat police. Policing is one component of white supremacy, involving other disparities in wealth, income, education, health outcomes and more. But our policing system is broken; this is no matter of a few "bad apples" spoiling relations between police and the Black community. Relations are terrible because most police officers are biased against Black people (as shown by the disparities as well as police support of a racist president who urges them to "dominate" protesters), and prone to aggression and violence (as shown by the domestic violence disparity). White police officers display the same implicit biases as white civilians. They are trained to serve a system that was designed to preserve white supremacy.
Given the massive scope of this problem, modest reforms and trainings are insufficient. Instead, the Movement for Black Lives recommends divestment from police, investment in Black communities, community control of public institutions including police and self-determination for Black people.
Now some of you were with me until that last part, which sounds impractical and radical. If you find yourself agreeing with the critique but balking at the proposed solution, I'd remind you that the same response was given when activists insisted slavery must be abolished (the economy of the South depends on it!) and segregation must end (it's always been this way, we're not ready, let's move slow!). Rather than nitpick about the feasibility of such a project, let's keep our focus squarely on the problem: the need to end white supremacy and to create a society in which Black lives are as honored as white lives. Let the fine points of legislation be decided by lawyers. Let us demand instead justice for Black people, which is long overdue.
Andrew Stone Porter is a Ph.D candidate studying Ethics & Society at Vanderbilt University.
Your Turn
Andrew Stone Porter
Guest columnist
Your Turn
Andrew Stone Porter
Guest columnist
Scenes from a May 28 protest in downtown Louisville over the shooting of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police.
$$$