'way beyond peaceful'
Duvall, Tessa
31 May 2020
After two nights of destructive and sometimes violent protests, a dusk-to-dawn curfew took effect Saturday evening as the Kentucky National Guard was set to patrol downtown Louisville's streets, aiming to restore order and curb vandalism from protesters angry about the police shooting of an unarmed black woman.
The March death of Breonna Taylor in her apartment during a police raid has triggered two nights of protests, with vandals and looters sweeping through downtown Friday.
On Saturday morning, city officials said the turbulent gatherings must stop.
"This has been a very sad night for our city, and as violence has raged across many cities in our country, it has been a sad night for America," Mayor Greg Fischer said early Saturday morning. "There does need to be ample recognition of the underlying inequity that causes so much of the frustration that we see in America and in our city.
"But there is no excuse for the destruction of property we've seen (Friday) evening," he said. "This is not protest; it is violence."
To help maintain peace, Gov. Andy Beshear activated the Kentucky National Guard, with about 350 soldiers being sent to Louisville by the afternoon.
"I hope everybody knows this is a big step and a tough step, and it's not one intended to silence any voice, because I want to hear," Beshear said. "But I want to make sure at the end of the day that we are all safe."
More protests were expected Saturday evening. But only a few dozen people had gathered in downtown by around 6 p.m.
Louisville woke up Saturday morning to stunning evidence of vandals' hourslong rampage the night before. Destruction was spotted across the city's downtown.
Fourth Street Live took the brunt of the looting that started Friday night and continued early Saturday morning. Several bars were broken into and liquor had been stolen, as reported Friday evening.
T-Mobile on Fourth and Liberty streets was trashed and looted, the alarm still blaring. Shelves and racks were empty where phones and accessories had been stolen.
Downtown was littered with people Saturday morning, walking their dogs, cellphones out, taking photos and surveying the damage. Many shook their heads or volunteered to help sweep away the shattered storefront glass.
Graffiti littered the facade of nearly every building. Broken window panes at the Metro Department of Corrections were a reminder of Thursday evening, the first night of protests.
LMPD partitioned off downtown streets where crews were cleaning up Saturday, with people sweeping the shards of glass off of the sidewalk on nearly every block.
Juniyah Palmer, Taylor's younger sister, took to social media to denounce the destruction early Saturday morning.
"At this point, y'all are no longer doing this for my sister! You guys are just vandalizing stuff for NO reason!" she wrote on Facebook. "Once y'all started vandalism, you took my sister's name out of place! I honestly feel like you guys are disrespecting my family wishes for a safe and NON-VIOLENT protest!"
No one should be surprised by the kinds of unrest we're seeing, Fischer said Saturday afternoon.
"If you feel like you're not being heard, you're going to shout a lot louder, and a lot more emphatically," he said.
But he also decried the chaos that dominated much of Friday night and was quick to blame it on "outside agitators" and "anarchists" intent on causing destruction, saying it went "way beyond peaceful protest."
Six people were arrested, and six police officers were injured.
Fischer's order placed all of Louisville Metro on a 9 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. curfew for Saturday and Sunday nights, preventing residents from being in the streets, parks and other public spaces.
Protests were fine, the mayor said, but demonstrators need to stop at sunset.
"If you want to help us have a safe city and an orderly city, and a city that can move through this type of heartbreak that we have here locally and around the country as well, please protest peacefully before the curfew goes into effect and then return home and be safe," Fischer told The Courier Journal.
"And then, make your voice heard again in a safe way. But once it gets dark, and once the more anarchic element of this starts appearing, people can get caught up in that."
The curfew was to end Sunday morning and will be reevaluated Monday morning.
Taylor, 26, an ER tech, was at her southwest Louisville apartment when police entered her home on a no-knock search warrant related to a narcotics investigation in the early morning hours of March 13.
Officers returned fire after Taylor's boyfriend fired a shot at what he said he believed to be intruders. No drugs were recovered from the apartment.
Taylor's death has garnered national attention in recent weeks, alongside other high-profile killings of black Americans – some at the hands of police officers – that have sparked massive demonstrations across the country.
On Monday, Minneapolis police killed George Floyd when an officer pressed his knee into Floyd's neck for more than eight minutes. Floyd's death was captured on video and shared widely. The ensuing nights of protests resulted in Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz announcing Saturday that he would be "fully mobilizing" the state's National Guard.
Floyd's death came at a time when many Americans were already outraged over the killing of Ahmaud Arbery, who was jogging in a south Georgia neighborhood when he was shot and killed by white men.
In Louisville, protesters carried signs and chanted about both Taylor and Floyd.
"Breonna Taylor! Breonna Taylor! Breonna Taylor!" hundreds of people shouted at City Hall, their fists hoisted in the air.
Thursday's protest began downtown around 5 p.m., just a couple of hours after the public heard the frantic 911 call made by Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, as she lay in the hall of her apartment, struck by at least eight bullets.
Seven people were shot during Thursday night's smaller, but still raucous, protest, with two injuries serious enough to require surgery.
"The tone clearly changed last night. The number of people on our street clearly changed last night, as well," Fischer said Saturday morning. "This turned from being a peaceful protest into violence and terrorism and looting on the streets of our city."
People returned to Louisville's downtown streets in even larger numbers Friday night. While many remained peaceful, vandals wreaked havoc across much of downtown: windows of office buildings, at least one hotel and restaurants were smashed. Looters sidestepped broken windows and rummaged through the bar area of Eddie Merlot's Prime Aged Beef & Seafood, hauling away armfuls of alcohol.
Throughout the night, Courier Journal reporters and photographers saw canisters of tear gas being fired; heard flash bangs exploding; and spotted numerous fires in trash cans and recycling bins. Shards of glass were everywhere, and anti-police graffiti was spray-painted on buildings and sidewalks.
Earlier in the evening, tensions rose as protesters spotted law enforcement officers inside the Hall of Justice. Protesters ripped the American and Kentucky flags from their poles in front of the building, using lighters and alcohol to set them ablaze.
Some hurled water bottles and other hard objects at the courthouse windows, splintering the glass. Other panes were smeared with red paint hand prints, made to look like blood.
Anthony Davis, a protester on Friday night, said violence was not the goal.
"We don't want to become violent," he said.
"Frustration will cause violence to surface. You can't stop that."
Voices from the protests' front lines
Louisville's youth demand racial justice. 3A
What a Courier Journal photographer saw
Michael Clevenger shares first-person account. 3C
Minneapolis protests flare across US
Activists call for an end to systemic racism. 14A
A protester kneels in front of Kentucky State Police in downtown Louisville during the second night of protest in response to the shooting of Breonna Taylor in her home by Louisville Metro Police.
Clinton Smith, district leader for CVS Pharmacy, surveys the damage to a store at Fourth and Muhammad Ali streets in Louisville.
$$$
