Protests downtown for Taylor stay calm
Ladd, Sarah; Glowicki, Matthew
28 Sep 2020
After a start to the weekend that saw dozens arrested at downtown demonstrations and standoffs between protesters and police, the daylight hours of the 123rd day of protests in Breonna Taylor's name were calm.
Jefferson Square Park, which has come to be called "Injustice Square Park" or "Breonna's Park" by protesters since marches began in Louisville in late May, was again a hub for activity Sunday.
A group of speakers from the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression on Sunday morning condemned last week's grand jury decision to not indict the police officers in the fatal Louisville Metro Police shooting of Taylor in March.
One officer was indicted in the case stemming from bullets shot into a neighboring apartment but not for those that struck 26-year-old Taylor.
Tyra Walker, a co-chair of the alliance, called on Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron to publicly release all the evidence presented to the grand jury.
"I have Black children. I have Black nieces and nephews," Walker said. "And I'm standing here to fight for them for them so that we don't have to repeat this ever again."
She condemned a "two-sided system" — "one for Black and brown people, and one for white people."
State Rep. Attica Scott, who police arrested Thursday during evening protests, said neither Taylor nor her family received justice last week.
"This week we are disgusted and disappointed, but we are not surprised," she said. "And we are not deterred."
Scott also Sunday she intends to fight "every single one of these bogus charges."
Other speakers condemned Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer for a countywide curfewthey said has only been used to target protesters.
Sunday marked the fifth day of the 9 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. curfew implemented by Fischer the day of the grand jury announcement.
In the afternoon, Spalding University employees, including President Tori Murden McClure, repaired and cleaned up damage to buildings from the night before.
Windows at Spalding University and Presentation Academy were smashed, and graffiti sprayed on several buildings after a night of protests, according to police.
Police caught on video a car in a Spalding parking lot being set on fire, and they said fireworks were used to set off "small explosions."
"While we denounce the dangerous, destructive acts that took place on our campus overnight, we want to make it clear that Spalding continues to support the struggle for equity in the name of social and racial justice," McClure said in a message to the campus community. "Indeed, the vast majority of the demonstrations that have occurred for the past four months have been peaceful and lawful, and they are raising important awareness about systems of injustice in our country and the suffering that is taking place as a result of them."
Kentucky National Guard members continued their presence in the city Sunday and were seen standing guard outside Fourth Street Live as well as downtown parking garages and judicial buildings.
At the square, the children of Darryl Ayo II and Stephanie Ayo held homemade signs.
"My brothers' lives matter." "My future matters! Do better for kids like us!"
"We teach our kids to be bold, be courageous and stand up for others no matter the fears," said Stephanie Ayo, who frequently brings Darryl III, 7, DeAngelo, 5, and DeMario, 3, to the downtown memorial.
As dusk approached, the park resembled a cookout, as it has on many days over the summer.
About 100 people were scattered throughout the square as a man played the piano, a young girl hopscotched and the smell of hot dogs wafted through the air.
Atop a nearby building, an officer appeared to kick up their feet and rest them on the ledge.
Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at mglowicki@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4989 or on Twitter at @mattglo. Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
From left, brothers Darryl Ayo III, 7; DeMario Ayo, 3; and DeAngelo Ayo, 5, leap down the steps of Metro Hall. Their parents, Darryl II and Stephanie Ayo, have been bringing them to the protests to support Breonna Taylor's family as well as their own. "We teach our kids to be bold, be courageous and stand up for others no matter the fears," Stephanie said.
Max Gersh/Courier Journal
Spalding University President Tori Murden McClure joins the facilities team Sunday to help clean up the campus was damaged overnight.
Spalding University
Reginique Jones, right, gives a massage to Stephon Mayes on Sunday afternoon at Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville.
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Jacquelyn Harden, of Columbus, Ohio, looked at the memorial for Breonna Taylor at Jefferson Square Park in downtown Louisville on Sunday. She stopped in Louisville while traveling south to pay her respects.
$$$
