Indiana AG authors op-ed defending Kentucky's Cameron over Taylor case
Magdaleno, Johnny
29 Sep 2020
Indiana Attorney General Curtis Hill in an op-ed for Fox News over the weekend defended his Kentucky counterpart who was criticized following his announcement that no officers would be charged for the shooting death of Breonna Taylor.
The op-ed was targeted at activists who condemned Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, whose announcement Wednesday thrust Louisville and cities across the country into new rounds of protest over police brutality against Black people in the U.S.
In a media appearance following Cameron's announcement, Black Lives Matter co-founder Alicia Garza compared Kentucky's attorney general, who is Black, to Bull Connor, a white public safety commissioner from Alabama who brutally enforced segregation in the 1950s and 1960s and had ties to the Ku Klux Klan.
"I think what I saw this morning was a Bull Connor speech in 2020," Garza told MSNBC's Joy Reid. "Unfortunately it was being given by a Black prosecutor."
Hill said the criticism went too far.
"Cameron is one of only two Black Republican state attorneys general in the U.S. I am the other," wrote Hill in the op-ed. "Comparing him to Bull Connor is an insult that makes no sense and is disconnected from reality."
Hill said a prosecutor's race should not influence their decision on a case.
"Having police officers, lawyers, prosecutors, judges, jurors and others from a diverse array of racial and experiential backgrounds helps us as a society overcome intrinsic biases that otherwise could taint the process," wrote Hill.
"But we must strive to ensure that the facts and evidence always drive findings of guilt or innocence — or of whether there is a legal basis to file criminal charges in the first place."
The grand jury involved in the case brought three charges of first-degree wanton endangerment against officer Brett Hankison, who fired into a neighboring unit on the night that police raided Taylor's apartment. The other two officers who participated in the raid and fired at Taylor's apartment were not indicted.
Hill is a frequent contributor to Fox News who has used the media network in recent months to weigh in on national issues like Black Lives Matter and police brutality.
Cameron
$$$
