Fairness Campaign pulls support for Louisville mayor amid protests
Kobin, Billy
08 June 2020
Add the Fairness Campaign to the growing list of groups and individuals who say they have had enough of Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer because of his handling of the Breonna Taylor case and the actions of police toward protesters around the city.
The LGBTQ advocacy group based in Louisville and its political action committee published an open letter Friday stating that they "repudiate" the Democratic mayor "and his actions."
"In response to protests of police violence beginning last Thursday, Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer allowed police to attack peaceful protesters repeatedly and with impunity," the letter says. "They shot chemical warfare agents and pepper balls directly at members of the media, children, elders and others exercising their first amendment rights to protest racism and police violence. Among them have been Fairness staff and allies."
Community leaders and various elected officials have questioned why Fischer said he welcomed peaceful protest while the Louisville Metro Police Department used tear gas to clear some nonviolent demonstrations over the past week.
Earlier this week, LMPD officials said police deployed tear gas after seeing numerous homemade weapons in the crowd and on the streets, including Molotov cocktail, bricks, wooden blocks and leaf blowers.
Assistant Chief of Police LaVita Chavous said the dispersals occurred because protesters gathered illegally without a permit.
Chavous and LMPD spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said police acted some nights before the 9 p.m. curfew — which Fischer ended Thursday — because of reports that some protesters had leaf blowers that could direct chemicals at police.
Fischer spokeswoman Jean Porter said earlier this week that LMPD is there "to protect public safety and keep order, and they make the decision to use tear gas when they believe that is in jeopardy."
On Saturday, Porter told The Courier Journal that the mayor "has been an ardent supporter of the Fairness Campaign and its initiatives and is disappointed by their letter."
"As he's said, some peaceful protesters were caught up in scary situations when decisions were made to use tear gas during earlier days of protest — out of concerns for public safety, when police saw evidence suggesting the potential for violence," Porter wrote in an email. "He has apologized that people were hurt and traumatized."
That explanation was not good enough for the Fairness Campaign and its Committee for Fairness and Individual Rights, or C-FAIR, which had endorsed Fischer since he took office in 2015.
"We deeply regret our previous support of a mayor who would allow a militarized police force to gas his own city and who refused to act after irrefutable, repeated evidence that his law enforcement was out of control," the Fairness Campaign wrote in Friday's letter.
"To all elected leaders, let us be clear: We are watching your actions in this moment of unmitigated police violence and will be uncompromising in our review of your response," the letter continued. "Silence and inaction are unacceptable and make you complicit."
In a comment provided by his spokeswoman, Fischer said he is "deeply committed to the mission of the Fairness Campaign and will fight for that mission throughout my time in office and after."
Protests over Taylor's death and police brutality continued in Louisville for the teneth straight day Saturday, the day after Taylor would have turned 27.
LMPD officers fatally shot Taylor inside her South End apartment March 13 while executing a drug-related search warrant.
In the application for the controversial no-knock search of Taylor's apartment, an LMPD detective wrote that police believed another man had used her home to receive mail, keep drugs or stash money from drug trafficking.
No drugs were recovered from Taylor's apartment following the raid.
Though largely peaceful, some demonstrations in downtown Louisville and in pockets of the city have been marred by violence, vandalism, looting and tear gas.
Demonstrators have also rallied over the death of David McAtee, a popular West End barbecue stand owner who was fatally shot when LMPD officers and National Guard soldiers released a volley of shots Monday while trying to disperse a crowd after curfew.
Police released video evidence that they say shows McAtee fired first, although his family said he would never knowingly shoot at officers, whom he had given free meals.
Chants have also mentioned black Americans such as George Floyd, a 46-year-old man in Minneapolis who died Memorial Day after a white police officer pressed his knee into Floyd's neck for nearly nine minutes, and Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old man in Georgia who was out for a jog in February when two white men confronted and fatally shot him.
Fischer has met with local protesters and temporarily suspended the use of no-knock search warrants, telling demonstrators last week that "I hear you."
A Metro Council committee also advanced legislation Wednesday that is named "Breonna's Law" and would sharply and permanently curtail LMPD's use of the no-knock warrants.
Still, the criticism that Fischer faces from local protesters — and from LMPD officers on the streets — has not gone away.
Late Friday and into early Saturday, a caravan of "several hundred" protesters in vehicles and on foot rallied outside Fischer's home in the Highlands, according to an LMPD spokesperson.
LMPD also said no arrests were made Friday related to the protests around the city.
The Fairness Campaign and its PAC said Friday they "fully support and will fight for all demands made by Black Lives Matter Louisville and other POC-led organizations, including the elimination of deadly 'No Knock Warrants' and an immediate end to qualified immunity, which police use as a 'get out of jail free card.'"
"Black Lives Matter," the Fairness Campaign letter concluded, "and we will accept nothing less than justice."
$$$
