Man shot, killed in area of downtown Louisville protest
Austin, Emma; Kobin, Billy
03 July 2020
A man was shot and killed Thursday in the area of Fifth and Liberty streets, according to Louisville authorities.
Louisville Metro Police Department spokesman Lamont Washington said the victim was found shot in the 400 block of South Fifth Street. He was taken to University of Louisville Hospital, where he was pronounced dead.
No suspects have been found, Washington added.
The victim has not been identified.
The intersection is near Jefferson Square Park, the site of multiple protests over the police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
There is no indication at this time that the shooting is related to any protest activity in Jefferson Square Park, Washington said, but he added that police are in the "extremely early" stages of the investigation.
"Unfortunately the people that commit these violent acts, they are the only ones who know they're gonna do it," Washington said. "I just encourage everyone in the city to learn a new way to deal with differences."
Eight people have been shot in the area related to the protests.
Seven people were shot by an unknown shooter on the first night of protests on May 28, and all of them survived. Last weekend, photographer Tyler Gerth, 27, was fatally shot by what protesters and police say was an agitated and disturbed demonstrator who unleashed a volley of gunfire inside the park just before sunset.
Steven Lopez, 23, a frequent participant in the protests, has been charged with Gerth's murder and nine counts of wanton endangerment.
Following Gerth's shooting, police cleared the park of tents protesters had used to camp out there for a month. While protesters are now allowed to use the park in the day, it is closed after 11 p.m.
With the shooting downtown on Thursday, there have been at least 62 homicides in the Louisville area to date this year. At this time last year, there had been 50 homicides in Jefferson County, with 92 by the end of the year.
A man in his 20s was shot to death near the 400 block of South Fifth Street on Thursday morning. LMPD spokesman Lamont Washington says there's no indication that the shooting was related to nearby protest activity.
Police inspect the area where a man in his 20s was shot to death Thursday morning.
$$$
