Davis statue must be removed from the Capitol. Now.
Gerth, Joseph
08 June 2020
Jefferson Davis still stands in the Kentucky Capitol rotunda.
He's there. Taunting every African American who comes through.
He's telling them that even though they may have won their freedom in the American Civil War, it was the South that won the peace that followed.
He's reminding them — as if they can forget — they live in a white man's world and there's not a damn thing they can do about it.
In many ways, the South is still winning; that's why we've seen protests against injustice and police brutality every day for the last week in Louisville. It's why our nation is afire with anger and violence following the deaths of Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd.
It's why the 15-foot-tall monument to treason and hatred must go.
Visitors to our Capitol can't see the beautiful bronze statue of Abraham Lincoln, the man who signed the Emancipation Proclamation, without seeing the hate-filled old bastard peering over Lincoln's right shoulder.
Gov. Andy Beshear said on Thursday that he doesn't believe the statue should remain in the state Capitol and his office is trying to decide if he has the power to remove it. Such decisions have traditionally been left to the state's Historic Properties Advisory Commission.
He needs to just act.
Send in a forklift. Take it out.
Dare someone to sue him over it.
Put it in a state warehouse somewhere until a space in the Kentucky History Center can be prepared for it, explaining how Davis quit his job in the U.S. Senate and returned to Mississippi, which had seceded at his urging.
That statue shouldn't be part of any exhibit that doesn't explain how the Confederacy was a racist institution built upon slavery and that Davis, who became its only president, is an embarrassment to the United States, the South and to Kentucky.
(It's too bad we can't reduce the 351-foot obelisk honoring him near his birthplace in Fairview to a big pile of rubble. Maybe we should repurpose it to honor those who Davis fought so hard to keep enslaved.)
We need to leave that corner of the rotunda empty until private funds can be raised to commission a new statue of someone deserving of the honor afforded to Davis for too long.
Perhaps we put up a statue of Carl Brashear, the native of Tonieville, in Larue County, who endured racism in the military to become the first African American U.S. Navy Diver, and then after losing his leg in an accident, rose to the rank of master diver.
Attorney General Daniel Cameron suggested Brashear when I asked a couple of months ago.
Or maybe, we erect a statue of the late state Sen. Georgia Davis Powers, the first woman and African American in the state Senate and a giant in the civil rights movement.
There are many more who would be more suitable for such an honor than Davis. In fact, it's hard to imagine anyone less deserving than Davis.
If the Historic Properties Advisory Commission balks at removing the statue and tries to block him from removing it or force him to put it back once he does, Beshear must reorganize the commission and fire those who support keeping the statue there.
The commission already punted on the issue once when it voted to keep the statue and to just remove the plaque that called Davis a "Patriot - Hero - Statesman."
It's time to take decisive action on the statue of a traitor who stands mocking every African American who enters the Capitol rotunda, decisive action like former New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu took when he ordered a statue to Davis and monuments to three other Confederate "heroes" removed from that city.
Even in Richmond, Virginia, one of the capitals of the old Confederacy, Gov. Ralph Northam announced Thursday that he would mothball the statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee, which towers 60 feet over Monument Avenue.
"You see, in Virginia, we no longer preach a false version of history. One that pretends the Civil War was about 'state rights' and not the evils of slavery. No one believes that any longer," Northam said in announcing his decision.
And if Beshear doesn't feel safe going that far, well, the Lowe's near me has a blue/green 20-foot x 30-foot tarp that should cover it nicely for $69.98.
Heck, I'll be happy to kick in an extra $30 to buy the silver-colored Blue Hawk brand plastic tarp that shouldn't clash with the gray marble walls of the rotunda, and a roll of duct tape to make sure the plastic wrap doesn't slip off, revealing the old racist to the world.
Throughout the coronavirus pandemic, Beshear has reminded us that "we're going to get through this, we're going to get through this together" virtually every single day. It's hard to imagine getting through anything together with an 84-year-old monument to our racist past in a place of honor.
Remove it.
Now.
$$$
