Black leaders: It's time to invest
Loosmore, Bailey
21 June 2020
Sadiqa Reynolds is done with just talking.
She's done with studies and reports and community conversations that never result in change. And she's ready for officials to finally put significant money toward reducing racial disparities in Louisville.
It's not just Reynolds who feels this way, either. On Friday, the president of the Louisville Urban League was joined by more than 50 predominantly Black community leaders in sending a petition to Mayor Greg Fischer, demanding the city invest in programs that improve the lives of Black residents.
"The people who've signed it, we do this work," Reynolds said Saturday. "We are the experts in it. But we've never had the ability to really scale the work that needs to be scaled because we never get the investment.
"We know how to do it already. ... It's time to move."
The 20-page petition came amid ongoing protests in downtown Louisville, where people have called for justice in the death of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was fatally shot by police in March.
And while the petition suggests a number of police reforms in response to Taylor's death, it also looks beyond the criminal justice system to changes that address housing, education, job opportunities and health care access.
"We wanted to say, 'Don't just get caught up in saying fire these officers,'" who shot Taylor in her apartment, Reynolds said. "We need those things to happen. And we deserve justice. But as important is changing these racist systems that are not allowing people to really live to their full potential."
The petition specifically calls for a $50 million Black community fund that could be spent on affordable housing, small business support and mental health care in predominantly Black neighborhoods.
It asks elected officials to begin that investment in the 2020-21 budget, which must be approved by June 30.
"We still have time right now, before we sign the current budget, to really make some adjustments to say, 'We hear you and we understand and we're ready to move in a different direction,'" said Anthony Smith, executive director of the nonprofit Cities United.
Such a move would be a reverse from Smith's experience with the Metro Council in the past.
As a former director of the Louisville Office for Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods, Smith said his department was routinely underfunded, and he couldn't accomplish initiatives.
"We value and lean so much on law enforcement and, as a city, that's hurt us," Smith said. "We've not been as imaginative and understanding of what it really takes to keep a community safe.
"It puts us in a place where now we've got to play catch up."
Metro Council President David James, who was named as a recipient of the petition, said the city has taken steps to address many of the issues in the document. But he added that the mayor has pushed back on some of the suggestions in the past.
"Some of the things the mayor and police chief have fought before, like a civilian review board" for the Louisville Metro Police Department, he said. "Apparently the mayor has had a change of heart and is interested in a civilian review board now."
In a statement Friday, a spokeswoman for Fischer's office said the mayor has "taken many steps to advance police reform in our city," including searching for a new permanent chief, announcing a top-to-bottom review of LMPD and establishing a work group to recommend an independent civilian review board with subpoena power.
"He is optimistic about the possibility for transformation, with so many people and groups ready to partner in the hard work for fighting for structural change at local, state and national levels," spokeswoman Jean Porter said in a statement, "from police reform to economic empowerment; to addressing health and education disparities; to ensuring our economy lifts up and works for all."
The Rev. Joe Phelps, a co-chair of EmpowerWest Louisville, who signed the petition, said it's important that officials listen to the Black leaders who crafted the document. And he hopes it serves as an "opportunity for our city to begin to balance the scales of justice."
"Some of the proposals (in the petition) are concerns that the Black community has been working on for years," he said. "They have been more than ready to lay this out. Now is a moment when hopefully the white community will hear them."
Protesters make their way through downtown Louisville on Thursday.
$$$
