'This hurts'
Ladd, Sarah
08 June 2020
Michael Jackson grew up avoiding cops in the streets of Chicago.
And the Louisville Metro Police sergeant, who was pictured marching with protesters and shaking hands with one last week, never intended to be one, either.
But on June 1, the 18-year law enforcement officer broke ranks and walked with a crowd protesting injustice and police brutality all the way from Sixth and Jefferson to 26th and Broadway, where they joined another crowd gathered near Dino's gas station.
The gesture came as passionate protests in the streets of Louisville over the deaths of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee by police have strained relations between cops and the community.
Jackson is determined to fix that.
Taylor, an unarmed ER tech, was in her apartment on March 13 when Louisville Metro Police officers entered on a "no-knock" warrant. She was shot at least eight times and died. Protesters have demanded, among other things, the firing and prosecution of the three officers who shot their guns that night, Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly and officers Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove.
Jackson was on the streets every night of the protests, but it wasn't until that Monday night that something broke. He had to join the protesters who were with him at his post in Jefferson Square Park and preparing to march to 26th and Broadway.
Chris Buntin, right, shakes hands with LMPD Sgt. Michael Jackson. Jackson walked with the crowd from downtown to 26th and Broadway. Buntin said he thought that showed a lot of respect, that Jackson cared about the situation.
It wasn't planned, he said.
And it didn't matter.
"That's what was kind of pure about it was the fact that there was no plan," he said. He just knew, he said, that "we gotta go."
"We have to be out there," he remembers thinking. "The community needs to see us in something other than the helmets and the gear that obviously doesn't work. Obviously, it looks very opposing from the outside looking in."
So, he and roughly eight other officers took the hour-long march with the protesters into the West End in full gear in the heat. It was all so heavy and hot that he said it felt like everyone was running the 2 ½-mile trek to join the other group of protesters gathered near Dino's gas station.
Along the way, he spoke with a woman who told him walking by his side was the closest she'd ever been, or wanted to be, to a police officer.
Chris Buntin, another protester, came up to him as he reached 26th and Broadway and thanked him for being there in the crowd, Jackson said.
They had never met before.
But without hesitation, the two shook hands.
Their handshake was captured by a photographer on loan to The Courier Journal from our sister newsroom, The Commercial Appeal in Memphis. Max Gersh snapped the image as hundreds of protesters mingled and chanted Breonna Taylor's name and "No justice, no peace."
In that photo, Buntin and Jackson locked eyes — Buntin in an "I can't breathe" hoodie and Jackson, in full uniform, extending an arm tattooed with the word "Freedom." He got the tattoo years ago along the bone in his forearm to remind him, he said, that freedom is often painful.
As is the road to healing for Louisville, Jackson said.
That brief moment is an example of what needs to continue around the world, he said.
From where he was standing when the photo was taken, Jackson said he couldn't read Buntin's hoodie or the words "I can't breathe" in bold white letters across the front.
Those words have been repeated over and over in memory of George Floyd, the man who died on Memorial Day after a Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for almost nine minutes while Floyd said he could not breathe. When Jackson saw the photo later, those words hit him hard.
"My uniform is ever so heavy," he said. "I want so much to show and tell people ... that from the side of being a police officer, that there are some wonderful police officers out here that ultimately love what they do and love the community.
"However," he added, "when you think about what's underneath this uniform, I woke up, I was raised, I am ... a black man."
He understood the pain in the angry chants he heard while walking with the protesters that night because of his life experience as a black man.
F--- the police! Prosecute the police!
But it hurt the officer in him.
He feels a duty to show that MJ the black man and Sgt. Jackson are the same. He loves what he does and who he is.
He's made it his mission to forge relationships in the community and his district during his 14 years in Louisville.
After serving in the military, law enforcement wasn't anywhere on his radar. It wasn't until he met a police officer in Nashville, Tennessee, who was so kind to him, he realized he could make an impact on a community while in uniform.
That officer "literally changed my thought process," Jackson said. He started thinking back to happier interactions he'd had with police growing up, like with an officer who sat on his grandparents' porch for a cup of coffee.
Inspired by his upbringing in a Chicago neighborhood where the police-community relationship was "less than stellar," Jackson swore to use his time in uniform to connect with people and forge relationships.
"Now that I have the opportunity as a police officer ... guess what? It won't be like that for me," he said. "I won't stay in my car."
So, he plays cards with people in his district — District 1. He shares meals on the hood of his car. He sips coffee with community members. He plays basketball.
"Those small gestures of getting out of your car or sitting on the porch drinking some coffee or just talking ... carrying groceries," he said. "It humanizes the badge."
During the march and handshake with Buntin, Jackson told the young man they both needed to put in work to bridge the gaps in police-community relations.
Buntin -- who could not be tracked down despite repeated efforts last week -- asked him if he would come back. Jackson promised he wasn't going anywhere.
He thanked the group around him for staying peaceful as they marched through the streets holding signs that read, "Am I next?" and "We demand police accountability."
There was no looting or burning, just a group of people in pain.
"I'm thanking him for letting me be a part of this moment," Jackson said of the moment in the photo. "And telling him that it's not done. This is not a one and done type of situation."
It's just the beginning, he said.
"We'll talk with our grandkids ... about this day," he said. "There'll be a lot of conversation about this, and that's the thing — the conversation cannot stop, the actions cannot stop. ... I can go out there and march all day long, and then tomorrow I'll be back at my desk. (If) nothing happened, that's not right."
Every time officers show support to the communities they're apart of, Jackson said, every time one goes out of their way to be kind, that is how healing begins. "It's the only recipe for it," he said.
Every kind action is another step toward flipping the narrative, he said, because it gives people memories of positive police interaction that they can come to expect.
"This is real," Jackson said of what's happening in the streets of Louisville and around the country. "This is the reality ... that if something does not change, if we don't do something to curb or redirect what's happening now across the nation, across the world, and will continue to repeat. Who wants to do that? I don't want to do it."
The pain in the city "is 100% real" and isn't going to evaporate overnight, he said.
"This hurts," he said. "This hurts because they hurt. We hurt. I see it. I see the pain."
While some in his own community feel like his uniform is a "smack in the face," he said he wants to show them that under his uniform and badge, he's a man who could be their uncle or cousin, someone sitting at their Thanksgiving table.
He's a man who understands what it means to go through life in black skin.
And he wears it to embody the change he wants to see.
If not him, he asked, then who?
Reach breaking news reporter Sarah Ladd at sladd@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ladd_sarah.Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
INSIDE: The story behind this powerful photo of a cop and a protester. 5A
Behind the photo
In one of Louisville's most memorable weeks in its history, The Courier Journal snapped hundreds of photos. In this occasional series, we are recounting key moments involving those who were photographed.
$$$
