Bail should be lowered for Black women in jail
Tezel, Alangoya
11 July 2020 
With protests sweeping the nation, Louisville has become an epicenter of civil unrest. From the shootings of Breonna Taylor in her home to David McAtee at his business, Louisvillians are demanding justice. Reports estimate that in the first week of protests alone, 125 protesters were arrested, and with help from the Louisville Bail Fund and The Bail Project, 116 were released.
Our ability to mobilize and support protesters in this time is commendable. Yet, for decades, we have overlooked the inequity of our bail system, a silence that has had detrimental impacts on Black women.
It is no secret that more women are being incarcerated now than ever – and at growth rates nearly double to that of men. Here in Kentucky, the number of women in jail has increased 1,694% since 1980. Yet, shockingly, a 2019 Prison Policy Initiative study found that 60% of women in jails are not convicted of a crime. They are not a flight risk. Nor are they dangerous. Rather, they remain incarcerated because they cannot afford to pay bail.
Women, and particularly Black women, bear a double disadvantage in our bail system.
First, many incarcerated women – an overwhelming 80% of women in jails – are mothers. Because incarcerated mothers are three times more likely to be the primary caretakers of their children, they are more likely than incarcerated fathers to take on the financial burden of child care. In Kentucky, this amounts to an average annual cost of $6,411.
Second, as women, they bear the burden of a wage gap. A 2020 study found that the average woman in Kentucky (working full time and year-round) is paid only 78.9% of what a man is paid – an immense wage gap. This means that mothers in Kentucky, despite their increased financial burden, earn on average $9,991 less every year.
The wage gap only widens with race. The latest national data shows that Black women earn only 61% of the average white man's salary (and 79% of the average white woman's salary). Black women are also at the greatest risk of incarceration, collectively representing 30% of all incarcerated women and only around 13% of the American population.
In short, women face greater financial burden and lower annual earnings as compared with men, a phenomenon compounded for Black women most at risk for incarceration in Kentucky, a state with incarceration rates higher than many foreign countries.
In Louisville's Jefferson County, only 26% of people offered cash bail could afford it, compared with the still-low state average of 39%. Consider that in 2015, the average woman in jail unable to meet bail had annual earnings of $11,071. With a nationwide median bail of approximately $10,000, it is no wonder that approximately 3,727 women remain in Kentucky jails today. Our bail system actively works against them.
Worse, our bail system is self-perpetuating. According to a 2016 national report, children with incarcerated mothers were more likely than those with incarcerated fathers to end up living with grandparents, family friends or in foster care. As a result, these children experience greater disruption and instability and are more likely to miss school, go hungry and suffer psychological trauma from parental separation. As one heart-wrenching example, a 2016 New York Times article found that the children of incarcerated women in Oklahoma were often placed in chaotic foster homes and were sexually abused, which ultimately contributed to their committing drug-related offenses and becoming incarcerated themselves.
After years of failed efforts, Louisville's Criminal Justice Commission has made bail reform part of its 2020 legislative platform, with a specific focus on reducing cash bails, requiring more proof to detain the accused, and speeding up trials. It is a good start, but without accounting for the unique disadvantages Black women face in our bail system, we are keeping mothers in jails longer and creating an ominous domino effect that could drive their children toward incarceration – the byproduct of the systemic racism and sexism within our policies.
Black women are leading the charge for racial equity both in Louisville and across the nation. We say we are committed to their cause – it's time we show it in our bail reform.
Donate to the Louisville Bail Fund and The Bail Project.
Alangoya Tezel is a Louisville native and medical school student at the University of Michigan. She has previously helped teach courses at the Metropolitan Detention Center, a federal prison in New York City.
Your Turn
Alangoya Tezel
$$$
