Justice transcends grand jury. It's time to channel anger into change
28 Sep 2020
It is not the decision protesters wanted.
For four months, they have taken to the streets of Louisville demanding justice for Breonna Taylor. Their relentless rallying cry: Fire and criminally charge the three Louisville Metro Police officers involved in the fatal shooting of the unarmed 26-year-old Black woman in her apartment March 13.
Instead, a grand jury that weighed the evidence announced Wednesday only one officer, former detective Brett Hankison, will be charged in the case, with wanton endangerment for shots that went into an adjoining unit — not homicide or murder. Hankison was fired by his chief in June for "blindly" shooting his gun through Taylor's door.
The other two officers who fired their weapons, Myles Cosgrove and Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, were not held responsible in Taylor's death.
To protesters who have marched for 121 consecutive nights, braved pepper balls and rubber bullets, endured jail and watched horrified as one of their friends in the West End and a fellow marcher were gunned down, the grand jury's decision is painful, unjust and unfair.
But it does not block justice for Breonna.
Justice for Breonna extends well beyond punishing the police officers who raided her home and took her life during a botched narcotics investigation.
Justice for Breonna means changing the system of over-policing and undervaluing Black communities and Black lives.
Justice for Breonna means reforming a criminal justice system in which Black people are more likely than white people to be arrested and convicted of a crime and nearly six times more likely to be incarcerated.
Justice for Breonna, who was an emergency room technician, means making health care more accessible to Black and brown people, who are more likely than white people to have chronic health problems and less likely to have health insurance.
Justice for Breonna means closing the longstanding achievement gap between Black and white students in our public schools, which hovers around an appalling 30% in Jefferson County.
Justice for Breonna means opening up opportunities for Black entrepreneurs, creating affordable housing across our city and investing in Louisville's Black neighborhoods.
Justice for Breonna means organizing voter registration drives and voting in record numbers to elect lawmakers who have the heart and courage to uproot and replace racist systems.
Justice for Breonna means channeling the anger and disappointment so many feel now into the wave of significant change this community needs.
The Louisville protests have already had a significant impact.
Breonna Taylor's name is now known all over the world. Her death has helped inspire a movement and is changing the way police departments do their job.
The Louisville Metro Council passed Breonna's Law on June 11, which bans "no-knock" search warrants that allow police to enter someone's home without announcing themselves.
On Aug. 13, state Rep. Attica Scott filed a bill to ban no-knock search warrants in Kentucky. Days later, Sen. Tim Kearney of Pennsylvania introduced a similar "Breonna's Law" bill for his state, saying Taylor should still be alive today.
And, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul announced in June the federal "Justice for Breonna Taylor Act," which would "effectively end no-knock raids in the United States."
On Sept. 15, the city of Louisville and Taylor's family announced a historic $12 million settlement — the largest on behalf of Louisville police and one of the nation's largest payouts for the shooting of a Black person by police. The settlement includes more than a dozen police reforms.
On Oct. 1, Yvette Gentry will become the first woman and the first Black woman in Louisville's history to lead LMPD. Gentry, a former LMPD deputy chief, is taking over as interim chief after embattled Louisville Police Chief Steve Conrad was fired June 1 and current interim Chief Robert Schroeder announced he's retiring at the end of September.
People across the city, state and nation are opening their eyes to the ugly and evil truth of racial injustice and the institutions that have held down Black people for so many years. In many corners, white silence is ending.
Much progress has been made.
Much work remains.
That's because justice for Breonna is bigger than the decision handed down by a grand jury.
Justice for Breonna guarantees a more just Louisville and a more just society.
It won't happen until we start working together to rip apart the systems that support institutional racism and build a society that truly values liberty and justice for all.
That work must start now. That's what Breonna would expect of us.
$$$
