No ruling yet on releasing Taylor case files
Costello, Darcy
25 Aug 2020
Releasing Louisville Metro Police's investigation into the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor would be premature and could hinder the integrity of the case, an attorney for the department argued Monday in court.
And even after Attorney General Daniel Cameron decides whether to charge the officers who shot Taylor, LMPD may not immediately release its case file, attorney Paul Guagliardo said in response to questions from Jefferson Circuit Judge Barry Willett.
If Cameron were to not to bring state charges, LMPD would have a "yellow light" to release materials, Guagliardo said. But there may be additional exemptions to open records law the department could claim before making it public.
Guagliardo's responses to Willett's questions came during a 45-minute hearing in The Courier Journal's lawsuit against LMPD, during which both sides made verbal arguments regarding the case file.
Willett made no decision Monday and said he planned to reread some prior cases, both sides' briefs and state statute before making a ruling on The Courier Journal's motion for summary judgment.
The Courier Journal sued LMPD on May 26, seeking a copy of the investigative file. The following month, LMPD fired one of the officers in the investigation, based on the internal case file, and The Courier Journal filed a motion stating the department had "willfully violated" the state's Open Records Act.
LMPD, however, has said in court filings that the news media was more interested in publishing stories than in ensuring a fair investigation.
On Monday, both sides largely reiterated the written arguments they'd made — focusing on the flaws in the opposition's cases.
One clear piece of contention is whether the investigative file in Taylor's case should be considered solely a criminal investigation or, since it went into the interim chief's decision to fire Officer Brett Hankison, it is also administrative.
A prior Kentucky Court of Appeals ruling, The Courier Journal's attorney Michael Abate argued, found nearly 40 years ago that the public is entitled to see the entire investigative file relied upon in an administrative action taken against a public employee.
And, he argued, interim LMPD Chief Robert Schroeder referenced the Public Integrity Unit investigation in Hankison's termination letter, delivered before the start of any LMPD Professional Standards Unit case.
Abate said after the hearing that The Courier Journal attorneys were pleased to get the chance to argue the case and "drive home the point that we are legally entitled to understand why the chief took action against an officer and fired him."
"The city has presented no argument for why we shouldn't see the basis for that firing now," Abate said. "We'll keep pushing strongly for immediate release of these documents because the public absolutely has the right to know what made the chief decide to fire Hankison and call his actions 'extreme violations' of LMPD policy."
During the hearing, Guagliardo stressed that the criminal Public Integrity Unit investigation was not an administrative case because it was not conducted by the Professional Standards Unit.
"It is critical to their argument that we make this criminal investigative file a PSU file. It is not. Chief Schroeder clearly relied on a portion of that file, that criminal file, to make that decision," Guagliardo said. "Normally, yes, PSU investigations are undertaken. He did not have to undertake one here, whatever the basis for his decision, there was enough in there. But the criminal investigation was still going on, and is still going on."
LMPD turned over its internal investigation into Taylor's March 13 fatal police shooting to outside law enforcement agencies on May 20.
The attorney general's office and FBI are additionally conducting their own independent investigations and have declined to offer a time frame for completion.
Cameron said Sunday, to quell local rumors about a decision, that his office was planning no announcement this week. He has also previously said that his office was waiting on ballistics tests the FBI had been conducting.
The status of that testing is not clear.
Taylor, 26, died March 13 after LMPD officers broke down her door while executing a no-knock search warrant signed by Judge Mary Shaw. Both police and Taylor's boyfriend say officers knocked, but there is disagreement on whether police announced themselves.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, has said he fired one "warning" shot as police entered, thinking intruders were breaking in. He struck Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the thigh.
Three police officers returned fire and Taylor was shot five times, dying in her hallway.
Hankison has been fired and is appealing that decision.
The other two officers to fire their weapons, Mattingly and Detective Myles Cosgrove, have been placed on administrative reassignment, pending investigation.
A fourth officer, Joshua Jaynes, who sought the warrant, has also since been reassigned.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello.
Artwork is created at Breonna's Circle in Jefferson Square Park on July 16 to mark the 50th day of protests following the death of Breonna Taylor at the hands of the Louisville Metro Police Department.
Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
The three police officers who fired their guns at Taylor's apartment are Brett Hankison, from left, Jonathan Mattingly and Myles Cosgrove.
courtesy of LMPD
$$$
