Family calls victim a natural peacemaker
Bullington, Jonathan; Aulbach, Lucas
01 July 2020
"Tiffany and I grew up fighting like cats and dogs, and Tyler was always the one that would come in and make peace and try to find the common ground or tell a joke to diffuse the situation."
Brittany Loewen
Older sister of Tyler Gerth
Tiffany Hensley had a gut feeling something was wrong.
The news reports said a man had been shot and killed Saturday night in Jefferson Square Park, which has been ground zero for ongoing protests over the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor.
Her baby brother, Tyler Gerth, had been at many of those protests, including the one Saturday night. Camera in hand, the 27-year-old Louisville native was determined to use his talents as a photographer to document the historic fight against racial injustice.
She tried to tell herself it wasn't him.
It's not my brother. He's fine.
Sometime later, a family member called to break the horrific news. Tyler was dead.
"You do go numb, but it's just disbelief," Hensley, 31, said of that phone call. "It's an automatic pain."
Three days later, in their first interview since his slaying, Gerth's sisters remembered him as a gentle and caring peacemaker whose commitment to building a better city they vowed to continue.
"He wanted to make sure my children didn't have to see the systemic racism that goes on today or the injustices that occur," Hensley said. "He wanted to fight for everyone to be equal and just be at peace."
Gerth was fatally wounded around 9 p.m. Saturday, when, according to police and witnesses, a man later identified as 23-year-old Steven Lopez fired on the crowd in downtown Louisville.
Lopez appeared in court Tuesday, where he pleaded not guilty to charges of murder and first-degree wanton endangerment. His grandparents previously told The Courier Journal that he had a traumatic childhood, was diagnosed with mental illness and had been spiraling out of control after he stopped taking his medicine.
"One of the biggest attributes that I think about with Tyler is his compassion, and so we absolutely have compassion for that individual and his family," said Gerth's eldest sister, Brittany Loewen, 34.
"There are clearly fatal flaws in our systems, in society, that need to be addressed. And I want to have those conversations when the time is right. But right now just doesn't feel like that time. We want to focus on Tyler and who he was and his legacy."
'I looked up to him' The youngest of three, Gerth was a "natural mediator," his sisters said.
"Tiffany and I grew up fighting like cats and dogs, and Tyler was always the one that would come in and make peace and try to find the common ground or tell a joke to diffuse the situation," Loewen said.
He loved animals and nature, spending the day watching movies or listening to his vast record collection, filled with everything from Motown and country to reggae.
Gerth volunteered with the Big Brothers Big Sisters Kentuckiana mentoring program. Last August, he was paired with 14-year-old Tim Cherry.
"I was like, 'I think I'm going to get along with him. He's very cool,'" Tim said Tuesday afternoon. "He was a good person."
Gerth was 14 years older, but they had a lot to talk about — Tim is a budding football player for Fern Creek High School who had plenty to learn from his Big Brother, who once took the field at Trinity High School.
Tim joined Gerth last season at a Louisville football game against Eastern Kentucky, and they trained together for a Big Brothers Big Sisters basketball game as well.
Both had a competitive streak, but they fed off each other — Tim said he helped Gerth with his jump shot on the basketball court, while Gerth worked with Tim on his stance as a defensive lineman.
Their relationship didn't stop at sports, though Tim's mother, Rhonda Nobles, said she often thanked Gerth for training with her son ("I can't run up and down the court and the football field," she joked).
Gerth constantly motivated Tim to take school seriously, and this spring, he earned a 4.0 grade-point average.
There were no secrets between the two, Tim said, and their bond ran deep. The two hadn't met in person since the coronavirus lockdowns began, but they texted often, about anything.
"I never actually had an older brother to look up to," Tim said. "Tyler was a great mentor to me, and I looked up to him for that. I really appreciate Tyler for that."
Wearing a "#Blacklivesmatter Always!" T-shirt on Tuesday outside Cardinal Stadium, where he and Gerth had once watched the Cardinals, Tim said he had a message Gerth would want people to remember.
"I think Tyler would want everybody just to bond," Tim said. "I think he wouldn't want racial tension going on. I think he would want everybody to come together and be as one."
'Uncle Tyler is not going to be around anymore' At home, Gerth was the favorite uncle to his seven nieces and nephews, always willing to play and be silly.
One of Loewen's favorite memories of her brother is the time the family went to Newport Aquarium and then a burger place for a bite to eat.
"My little girl, she ate her meal and decided she was still hungry, so she crawled up in Uncle Tyler's lap and proceeded to eat his hamburger," she said. "And he just totally let her and made a big joke of it, was just so good with her, so good about loving her and caring for her and that tender heart that he has I think just shown through every time he was with our kids."
Though the coronavirus outbreak limited their time together, the family was able to see one another a few weeks ago. Gerth asked Loewen for a haircut that preserved his fledgling "man bun," she joked, and then played outside with the kids.
In the last three days, his sisters faced the gut-wrenching task of trying to explain his death to their young children. Hensley's oldest, 7, reacted with sadness and quiet, she said.
"I don't know if he quite understands," she added. "It's difficult to relay that kind of message to your kids, to have to see death so soon."
Loewen said she and her husband tried to talk to their children about being a light in a broken world.
"But having to have that conversation, that Uncle Tyler is not going to be around anymore, but that he was a hero and that he died fighting for what he believed in," she said. "And we want to raise our children to be very much like their Uncle Tyler."
'In a world we never dreamed we'd be in' After his death, the family set up a GoFundMe page to raise money with the goal of starting a nonprofit in Gerth's honor, with donations going to "social justice concerns close to Tyler's heart, including education, support services and fighting inequality."
As of Tuesday evening, they've raised more than $28,000.
"We're in a world we never dreamed we be in," Loewen said. "But we're trying to think about Tyler and what he would have wanted."
They also started an email account and have asked Gerth's friends and family to send stories of him to remembertylergerth@gmail.com.
A private funeral service for friends and family is scheduled for Friday. His sisters said the family is hoping soon to schedule a public celebration of his life.
Reach Jonathan Bullington: 502-582-4241; JBullington@courierjournal.com; Twitter: @jrbullington. Reach Lucas Aulbach: laulbach@courier-journal.com; 502-582-4649; Twitter @LucasAulbach.
"Tiffany and I grew up fighting like cats and dogs, and Tyler was always the one that would come in and make peace and try to find the common ground or tell a joke to diffuse the situation."
Brittany Loewen
Older sister of Tyler Gerth
Tyler Gerth's family members look over old family photographs at Tyler's parents' home Tuesday.
Alton Strupp/Courier Journal
A photograph of Tyler Gerth, second from left, with family members. Gerth was fatally shot at a downtown Louisville protest on Saturay.
Contributed by family
Courier Journal reporter Jonathon Bullington, from left, interviews Tyler Gerth's sisters, Brittany Loewen and Tiffany Hensley, as they discuss their brother, their loss, and what he stood for on Tuesday. Gerth was a 27-year-old Louisville native and photographer.
Family portraits of Tyler Gerth and his sisters, Brittany Loewen and Tiffany Hensley, inside their parents' home.
$$$
