Judge: Police chief must testify
Costello, Darcy
23 Sep 2020
Judge Audra Eckerle has found interim Louisville Metro Police Chief Robert Schroeder "failed to comply with a lawful subpoena" by the Louisville Metro Council committee conducting an investigation into Mayor Greg Fischer's handling of the Breonna Taylor case and monthslong protests.
And she has ordered Schroeder to testify before the Government Oversight and Audit Committee on Monday or be held in contempt.
"Chief Schroeder shall avoid any contempt and associated penalty by so testifying," Eckerle wrote in the ruling.
Schroeder has previously announced he intends to retire on Oct. 1 — at which time the council committee may no longer be able to compel his testimony through its subpoena powers.
The committee is investigating Fischer's handling of the Taylor case, David McAtee's death and the city's response to protests for racial justice. Its first focus, to avoid interfering with ongoing investigations, has been the city's response to protests that have lasted more than 120 consecutive nights.
It issued its first subpoenas in the investigation on Aug. 3, calling on Chief of Public Safety Amy Hess and Schroeder to testify. Both challenged the subpoenas in court, arguing that a pending federal civil lawsuit prevented them from publicly testifying.
Eckerle ruled against that argument on Sept. 8, calling on them to deliver public testimony. Last week, Hess appeared before the committee and said she has "made mistakes" during the racial justice protests, including asking questions about police tactics that were at times interpreted as directives that had "consequences."
"I made mistakes," Hess said. "Those things were decisions that had to be made very quickly, and without having a full appreciation of the consequences that may ensue.
"That said ... we got better at this. We got better at communicating. We got better at being able to understand what is merely a question of curiosity, what was merely a question to better understand a situation and what was being interpreted or over-interpreted as a directive."
Schroeder, who appeared at the committee hearing, declined to answer questions. His attorney, Joey Klausing, had at that point asked Eckerle to reconsider her order requiring him to testify.
In response, council members voted 9-1 last week to authorize council attorneys to file a motion to compel his testimony.
Councilman Brent Ackerson, D-26th District, the chairman of the investigating committee, on Tuesday recommended that council members review the five hours of previous testimony from Hess and LMPD commanders and be prepared to ask questions during Schroeder's testimony.
It's scheduled for four hours on Monday, beginning at 1:30 p.m., and no other guests are expected to testify during that time.
"I expect it to go as long as you have questions," Ackerson told committee members. "When your all's questions are done, that's when we will conclude the meeting."
Taylor, 26, died March 13 after officers serving a signed no-knock search warrant broke down her door. Police say they knocked and announced their presence but attorneys for Taylor's family and her boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, have disputed that.
Walker said in a recorded police interview he didn't realize it was police knocking and that he and Taylor heard no response when they called out to ask who was there. When police broke down the door, he fired one shot, which police say struck Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly in the femoral artery.
Mattingly and two other officers — detectives Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove — returned fire, spraying the apartment with more than two dozen bullets and striking Taylor five times. She died on her hallway floor.
Local protests began May 28 after The Courier Journal published audio of a frantic 911 call made by Walker. They have persisted in the months since.
Klausing, Schroeder's attorney, declined to comment Tuesday on the judge's ruling.
$$$
