Downtown is in eye of the storm as decision nears in Taylor case
23 Sep 2020
Depressing.
That's the only way to describe downtown Louisville on Tuesday as we wait, and wait and wait, for Attorney General Daniel Cameron to finally announce what charges, if any, he'll file against the police officers who were involved in Breonna Taylor's death.
Police have shut down traffic on the streets going north and south; some virtually the entire route from Broadway to Market Street.
The closer you get to Jefferson Square, what has been the epicenter of about 115 days of protests, they have put concrete barricades and heavy trucks to block the routes.
Police stand guard at some street corners.
Some have said it looks like a war zone.
The streets aren't pocked with craters made by grenades and mortars, though.
Roads aren't lined by burnt out tanks and Humvees.
They're not lined by anything but signs on parking meters that warn "No Stopping," as if anyone could make it past the police officers, concrete barricades and the heavy trucks to park there if they want to.
To me, it more resembles Miami or New Orleans or Galveston, Texas, in the uneasy hours before a Category 4 hurricane approaches.
People have stayed home. There is hardly anyone on the streets — even fewer than the handful who have routinely kept coming to their offices in the towers in this post-coronavirus world in which we're living.
Buildings for blocks around Jefferson Square have plywood and particle board over their first-floor windows. More than there have been in the early days of the protests when a couple of nights turned violent and destructive the last weekend of May.
Crews worked quickly to install more and more wood on the windows at Fourth Street Live, the entertainment district that suffered damage months ago. It smelled like a lumber yard there because of all the fresh clean 2-by-4s and the big 4-by-8-foot panels.
Some businesses hoped to weather the approaching storm with simple signs that said things like "Support Black Businesses" or "Black Owned Business."
The consensus on the street is that whatever Cameron announces, it won't be enough to satisfy protesters who have demanded the three officers who fired into Taylor's apartment be arrested and charged with murder.
"We know what the decision is going to be. Everybody does. That's why they're doing this. They know," one homeless man told me Monday evening after he hit me up for a buck so he could buy some ramen noodles.
One man who said he works in 400 West Market building took an optimistic approach on Tuesday morning. "I don't think it's going to be as bad as everyone thinks."
I hope he's right.
I'll tell you, I don't understand the violence that we saw in Louisville in the early days of protests and what we've seen in places like Minneapolis and Kenosha, Wisconsin, in the days since.
I do understand that we have allowed racism and police brutality to go on for far too long.
I do understand the anger and the desire for revenge.
I understand the pent-up frustration of for years saying that "Black Lives Matter," only to hear the racist retorts that "All Lives Matter" or that "Blue Lives Matter." And yes, those retorts are racist.
I understand the pain of losing someone to gun violence.
But I don't understand how throwing rocks at windows helps. I don't understand how indiscriminately firing guns helps. I don't understand how destroying the property of people — many of whom agree with you, at least for now — helps your cause.
I also don't understand how a police department can not summarily fire a police officer who taunts on social media someone she shot with pepper balls during a protest.
I can't understand how a police department doesn't summarily fire a police officer who aims pepper balls at a television reporter and photographer, appears to reload, and then fires at them again.
And I can't understand why a police department would fire tear gas at a peaceful crowd as it did on May 29 and May 30 when studies have shown that aggressive policing like that actually causes crowds to react violently.
We can have justice for Breonna Taylor without tearing our city apart and making all the thousands of dollars our downtown business owners have spent on on plywood and wasted money.
We can even have justice for her if Cameron's decision doesn't please everyone — no matter which way it goes.
But everyone — protesters and police alike — have to make an effort to control their impulses and actions. Or downtown is going to be a depressing place for a long time.
Be safe.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
$$$
