Calipari joins effort for minority opportunities
Hale, Jon
14 July 2020
LEXINGTON — Kentucky coach John Calipari's plan to provide more opportunities for minorities in college athletic departments is ready to begin.
Calipari, Harvard coach Tommy Amaker and 35 other college coaches are partnering with the John McLendon Minority Scholarship Foundation to launch the McLendon Minority Leadership Initiative, which is described as a "coach-driven program to create access to and opportunity for meaningful employment experience for minority candidates — known as MLI Future Leaders — and enhancing their career options."
Calipari will fund five MLI Future Leaders each year for six years. UK plans to join the program for the 2020-21 athletics season.
"It was really important for me to take a step back these past few weeks and listen. Now it's time to take action," Calipari said in a news release announcing the program. "The MLI is about access and opportunity: real-world experience and networking platforms designed to elevate talented young women and men of color who have previously been ignored by a system that lacks diversity and inclusion. For this work, I couldn't think of a more appropriate vehicle than the McLendon Foundation. I'm excited about where we're headed and feel this is a great first step toward affecting measurable change in our corner of the world."
The program will include jobs in a variety of areas, including business operations, communications, compliance, equipment, facilities, finance, donor and gifting, game management, human resources, marketing, team-specific roles, ticketing and video and content creation.
Postings with specific descriptions of the jobs at each participating athletic departments will be open for applications on August 1. A pre-application process is open at MinorityLeaders.org.
The program is named in honor of Hall of Fame coach John McClendon, who is considered the first Black basketball coach at a predominately white university.
In the wake of worldwide protests against racial inequality sparked by the deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor, Calipari proposed creating a minority internship program to increase opportunities for people of color in college athletics.
"I look at this and say our athletic departments need to start looking different so that coaches can start looking different, so that ADs can start looking different," Calipari said during a recent episode of his "Coffee with Cal" web show focusing on race issues. "Maybe the board of trustees start looking different, which means presidents start looking different and changes the whole dynamic of what we're dealing with."
Jon Hale: jahale@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @JonHale_CJ. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/jonh.
"Now it's time to take action," says Kentucky coach John Calipari, who joins dozens of college coaches to launch the McLendon Minority Leadership Initiative in increase representation in college sports.
Mike Weaver/Special to Courier Journal
$$$
