'We have to save our kids'
Aulbach, Lucas
19 Aug 2020
"This is our future. These kids could have been great."
Percy Miller
longtime Louisville philanthropist also known as Master P
Percy Miller can afford to pay for 3-year-old Trinity Randolph's funeral. But the way he sees it, it shouldn't have come to this.
"We have to save our community, and we have to come together," Miller, who is better known as the rapper Master P, said Sunday, his voice rising. "The unity has to be real, and the way we've come together for Breonna (Taylor), we've got to come together for all these kids that are dying to senseless violence."
Protesters have been in the streets for months to call for action against the police officers over Taylor's fatal shooting at her apartment in March. But Miller, a longtime Louisville philanthropist, and others say her death isn't the only one on their radar.
A shooting that left two dead and two injured Monday night marked the 100th homicide Louisville Metro Police have responded to in 2020. And while a global pandemic and protests over police killings continue, advocates say the numbers are clear — with more than four months remaining until we turn the calendar to 2021, violence in Louisville has become a crisis of its own.
Since the city and Jefferson County merged governments in 2003, the most homicides the police department has investigated in a year was in 2016, when there were 117. Police statistics dating to 1960 show the most homicides in the county before the merger came in 1971, when 110 were reported.
This year, the city is two months ahead of the pace set in 2016, when Louisville reached 100 homicides on Oct. 19. This year's onslaught comes after the city saw 92 homicides in 2019, 81 in 2018 and 102 in 2017.
"My detectives will continue to try and provide answers to all of our families. Every single one of them deserve to hear them," LMPD Homicide Unit Lt. Donnie Burbrink told reporters Tuesday. "We can only ask for the city of Louisville to assist us in this effort. As one of the victims' family members stated to me earlier, it takes a village."
Many of the victims are young. Of the 100 homicide victims this year, more than 40 didn't turn 26. Some of those victims, according to anti-violence activist Christopher 2X, never had a chance because they grew up in an environment that normalized violence at a young age.
"Twenty-five and under are taking the brunt of this, and the shooters are around the same age," 2X said Sunday at a press conference alongside the family of Trinity Randolph, a 3-year-old girl shot multiple times alongside her father, Brandon Waddles, on Friday. Their deaths marked the 96th and 97th criminal homicides this year in Louisville.
The numbers are grim. Just 31 of the 100 homicide cases have been closed, Burbrink said, and of the more than 360 nonfatal shootings the department has investigated, just 40 have been cleared.
Dr. Sarah Moyer, director of Louisville's health department, said her office works closely with the city's Office of Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods to fight back against the wave of violence. It's a public health crisis like any other, she said.
"Just like we're tackling COVID and diabetes and hypertension, it's just another health outcome that has inequities in who it affects and how it affects them," she said Tuesday. "We're tackling it just like we're tackling all our other health outcomes — trying to address the root causes and really get to some of the systemic issues that are causing it."
Of the 100 homicides, 77 of the 98 victims who have been identified were Black (the ages and races of the victims of Monday night's homicide have not yet been released). More than 80 of the homicides occurred west of Interstate 65.
Mayor Greg Fischer didn't hesitate to refer to the rising murder rate as a major health concern. It's critical to increase funding for programs that work with young people and stop shootings before they happen, he said. Those include programs like Pivot to Peace, an initiative that connects people hospitalized with gunshot or stab wounds with counseling and mentoring programs to help them make lifestyle changes once they're released.
"We've long called homicides and violence a public health crisis," Fischer said Tuesday. "... Most people think about it from an enforcement standpoint, with the police, but if we can invest more in intervention and prevention and education and out-of-school-time opportunities, that's where you can really combat the hopelessness that's so often at the root of these homicides."
People of all ages, and all walks of life, have been impacted, though.
David Boggs, a 50-year-old Prospect father of four, was killed last week in an unsolved shooting that police officials have pegged as "probably a robbery that went bad." He's one of 15 homicide victims this year who were 50 years old or older. The oldest victim was 66-year-old Douglas Heuer, who was stabbed to death in March in Douglass Hills. Jacob Burnett has pleaded not guilty to murder charges in that case.
The impact goes beyond those who have been killed. The words of the survivors tell the victims' stories more than the police reports.
Tyronn Randolph lost a grandchild when Trinity was killed last week in her dollhouse alongside her father. Randolph's daughter, Tynekia, lost a daughter.
Tynekia was innocent like Trinity, he said — she's still alive, but in many ways, she's a victim as well.
"I raised my daughter in a different way," he said. "When you raise a child, you can't change what they do when they're grown, but my child's not that type of child."
Trinity "never had anything doing anything with the streets," her grandfather said, as if a 3-year-old girl could possibly be involved in gang activity. But those bleak words paint a clearer picture of what Louisville is facing.
Miller, the rapper paying for Trinity's funeral, said he supports the protests calling for justice in Taylor's shooting. He released a song last month calling for systematic changes following her death. But people in the community also will need to play a role to cut into the city's skyrocketing homicide rate, he said.
"This has to stop," Miller said. "How are we going to have a future? Who's going to take care of the elderly in the community?"
To be sure, Louisville is not the only city seeing a spike in homicides. Deadly shootings are up 30% in Philadelphia, according to a USA TODAY data review, and Chicago has seen a 40% increase through the first seven months of the year.
Louisville's homicide rate is "more than unfortunate — it's horrible," said Catherine Mekus, the local leader of Moms Demand Action, a campaign to end gun violence in America. But "unfortunately, it's not a surprise. It's happening across the country."
The coronavirus pandemic and ensuing fallout from the shutdown of schools and businesses around the nation have exacerbated problems that were widespread in many economically disadvantaged communities, she said, and one shooting can lead to others.
"People are backed against the wall economically," she said. "... And I've been told by people who know more than I do that there's a lot of revenge killings that are going on — someone will kill someone, and then someone else killed their friend. It's just awful."
Mekus, like Fischer, touted Pivot to Peace and other groups her organization works with to prevent violence. And Burbrink, who said revenge shootings may have played a role in the violence, urged people in the community to work with police.
Gangs have had a hand in the rising homicide rate, as has the pandemic, but it's "a much more complex answer with a lot more moving parts than just trying to blame it on one small issue."
Some people don't trust police, he acknowledged, but violence is an issue that impacts everyone. The most important job police have, he said, is doing as much as possible to prevent homicides — and to provide answers when homicides occur.
"If you don't feel comfortable calling us and talking to us about this, I understand," Burbrink said. "Put it on the anonymous tip line. Let us follow up on the tips that you're willing to provide us. Let us buy back some of the credibility in these communities."
Miller, the rapper, said he was stirred to act this month when Semaj Miller, a 14-year-old standout youth basketball player in Los Angeles who played in the same league as his sons, was shot and killed in an unsolved homicide.
Stories about kids like Semaj and Trinity, he said, should be a wake-up call to anybody.
"When you look at the kids that are dying, I mean, it's thousands when you look at it, just around the U.S.," he said. "That's what needs to stop. We have to save our kids. ... The same way we got the message sent for Breonna, we need that for these kids, too. We need this for Semaj. This is our future.
"These kids could have been great."
"This is our future. These kids could have been great."
Percy Miller
longtime Louisville philanthropist also known as Master P
POLICE TIP LINE
The phone number for Louisville Metro Police's anonymous tip line is 502-574-5673.
Tenisha Porter becomes emotional during a press conference on Sunday while discussing the killing of her 3-year-old great-niece, Trinity Randolph, who died along with Trinity's dad, Brandon Waddles, in a shooting.
$$$
