She led charge to ban no-knocks
Loosemore, Bailey
26 July 2020
"I know that's not the only victory, that we still have
a whole
lot more
to do. But it sat well with me."
Keturah Herron
Keturah Herron felt powerless.
A Black woman had died at the hands of police in Louisville. And as a Black woman, herself, she didn't know what she could do.
It was a question many had been asking themselves in the wake of the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old ER technician who was killed March 13 in her Louisville apartment.
And as others began breaking off into various roles — leading protests and organizing volunteers — Herron knew she needed to contribute the best way she could.
She needed to go after a policy change.
Herron, a policy strategist at the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky, usually lobbies for legislative changes at the state level.
But after learning about the no-knock search warrant Louisville police used to enter Taylor's apartment, Herron focused her attention on the city, drafting an ordinance she hoped the Metro Council would adopt to ban the warrants outright.
No-knock clauses allow officers to enter a building without knocking, though they're required to identify themselves as police after gaining entrance.
Court records show that police obtained a warrant with a no-knock provision for Taylor's apartment from Circuit Judge Mary Shaw, though officials have said that officers knocked and announced their presence.
Taylor's boyfriend Kenneth Walker, who was in the apartment at the time the warrant was served, has said he did not hear anyone say they were police and fired at what he thought were intruders.
Taylor died in the ensuing gunfire.
Herron,40, who grew up in Richmond, Kentucky, said she wanted to prevent such a tragedy from ever happening again.
"When Breonna's case blew up, I felt that that was the only thing I could do as a Black woman in our community," she said. "It was important that I use my talents and access to resources to get something done."
With poet Hannah Drake and a small group of other activists, Herron got to work researching no-knock bans and calling council members to talk about why they should pass an ordinance.
"One of the things about policy, people don't understand all the background work and all the phone calls" that go into it, Herron said. "It's not just as easy as writing a piece of legislation and saying, 'This is it.'
"When it comes to policy work, you're really whipping votes up until minutes before the meeting. Then sometimes during the meeting, you're still contacting and texting people and putting in that work."
For weeks, Herron spent hours on the phone, encouraged by the widespread support the group received both locally and nationally.
In June, as the Metro Council discussed the ordinance, so many people called in support of the ban that city officials diverted them to a separate inbox.
Herron said she was proud to see the effort succeed when, on June 11, the 26-member council unanimously passed the ordinance, dubbed Breonna's Law.
But her work didn't truly feel like a victory until she heard Taylor's mother speak in favor of the ban.
"All Breonna wanted to do was save lives," Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, told the council before the vote. "So it's important this law passes, because with that, she'll get to continue to do that, even in her death."
"I know that's not the only victory, that we still have a whole lot more to do," said Herron, who plans to now push for a no-knock ban at the state level. "But it sat well with me knowing her family felt a little joy with Breonna's Law passing."
"I know that's not the only victory, that we still have
a whole
lot more
to do. But it sat well with me."
Keturah Herron
Herron
$$$
