Poll shows Booker surging past McGrath for Senate seat
Sonka, Joe
19 June 2020
A new poll shows Charles Booker surging past Amy McGrath in Kentucky's Democratic U.S. Senate primary, with Election Day rapidly approaching on Tuesday.
The survey, conducted by Oakland, California-based pollster Civiqs and commissioned by progressive think tank Data for Progress, found Booker, a state representative, leading McGrath 44% to 36% in the primary match up, followed Mike Broihier at 4%.
The poll also showed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell easily beating both McGrath and Booker in potential general election races this fall, though having a smaller margin of victory against Booker.
Civiqs, which has not polled statewide races in Kentucky in the past, conducted the survey of 898 registered voters in Kentucky online from June 13-15, with a 3.8% margin of error.
McGrath's campaign has purchased over $3 million of television and radio ads for the final week of the primary campaign, an unprecedented total for a primary race.
However, Booker's campaign has been able to compete on the airwaves with a late surge in contributions, raising $2.4 million since the beginning of June, after raising only $316,000 in the first three months of 2020, according to campaign manager Colin Lauderdale.
The Civiqs survey is the first from an independent pollster to examine the Democratic primary race, though the Booker campaign released numbers from its internal pollster on Saturday showing the candidate surging — but still 7 percentage points behind McGrath.
Most political observers viewed McGrath as the front-runner in the race because of her significant fundraising advantage, early start and support from the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
McGrath has broken numerous fundraising records and amassed nearly $30 million in campaign contributions by the end of March, spending much of those funds on advertisements looking past the primary and targeting McConnell.
However, a noticeable shift in the race has occurred in recent weeks, as widespread protests focused on the death of Breonna Taylor in Louisville, who was shot eight times in her home by LMPD officers.
Booker attended numerous protests and marches in Louisville and was perceived by many Democrats as a leader on the issue, while some questioned the lack of action by McGrath.
Booker has also picked up a slew of endorsements in recent weeks, including from U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and former Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes.
On Thursday, Sen. Elizabeth Warren announced her backing.
A spokesman for McGrath's campaign said from June 1, the campaign has raised about $4.8 million and has three internal polls ending Wednesday that all showed McGrath with double-digit leads.
The Civiqs poll showed that less than half of the Democrats surveyed viewed McGrath favorably, while 27% had an unfavorable opinion of her. Booker, on the other hand, had a favorable rating of 74% of Democrats surveyed, with only 4% having a negative opinion.
The poll had McConnell beating McGrath 53% to 33% in a general election and beating Booker 52% to 38%.
Another unknown factor in the outcome of the Tuesday primary is the coronavirus pandemic, as most voters are expected to vote absentee by mail.
According to Kentucky Secretary of State Michael Adams, 889,679 registered voters in Kentucky requested a mail-in absentee ballot by Monday's deadline, in addition to 48,044 who had already voted in person by that day. It is not known how many will mail back their completed ballot or how many Democrats sent one in before the apparent Booker surge in June.
$$$
