U of L assistant arrested at protest
Aulbach, Lucas
01 June 2020
University of Louisville men's basketball director of operations Kahil Fennell was arrested Saturday night in Louisville at the Breonna Taylor protests, according to the May 30 booking log, and charged with unlawful assembly.
Fennell's citation said he was arrested at 10 p.m. in the 800 block of W. Jefferson Street, the site of some of the demonstrations. The arrest report said he was in violation of Louisville's 9 p.m. curfew and was taken into custody after failing to comply with an order to leave.
Louisville coach Chris Mack published a statement early Sunday, after he'd spoken to Fennell but before his arrest was publicly reported, saying he hoped his program could "play a part in helping to heal an entire community we proudly represent."
Mack said later Sunday that the staff would support Fennell in the aftermath of the arrest.
"Earlier this morning Kahil and I spoke and I was made aware of his booking," Mack said in a statement. "I stand by my statement I made later in the morning and I stand by Kahil. When he feels the time is right he will comment."
Fennell was far from the only person in Louisville to be charged with unlawful assembly on Saturday, the third night that protests over the police shooting of Taylor rocked the city. Around 40 people were arrested Saturday, Mayor Greg Fischer said the following morning.
Fennell is one of more than 30 people to face misdemeanor unlawful assembly charges following Saturday's events, according to the Louisville Metro Corrections booking log.
The protests in Louisville were among the many demonstrations against police brutality that lit up the country this weekend. The local protests took place over the March death of Taylor, who was shot and killed in her apartment in March by officers executing a no-knock warrant.
Demonstrators have called for the officers involved to face harsher consequences and other reforms in the police department. Longtime Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad announced his retirement earlier in May.
Fennell published a Twitter post Thursday in support of the protests.
Fennell came to Louisville in 2018, when Chris Mack took over as head coach. He had previously been on the coaching staff at Portland State.
$$$
