LMPD says it won't allow protests in public streets
Aulbach, Lucas; Loosemore, Bailey; Costello, Darcy
10 Aug 2020
Protesters told The Courier Journal their regular marches are intended to disrupt the city, and they will not stop protesting until the three officers who fired their weapons the night Breonna Taylor was killed face criminal charges.
Louisville's Metro Police Department is cracking down on foot and vehicle protests that have taken place citywide for more than 70 consecutive days — a move that some activists said Sunday is an "intimidation factor" intended to silence their calls for racial justice.
Department officials announced Sunday afternoon the department no longer will allow protests in public streets. Instead, participants are confined to sidewalks and must follow pedestrian and traffic laws. Those who do not comply could be cited or arrested, police spokeswoman Jessie Halladay said.
In response, local protesters told The Courier Journal their regular marches and demonstrations are intended to disrupt the city, and they will not stop protesting until the three officers who fired their weapons the night Breonna Taylor was killed face criminal charges.
Taylor, a 26-year-old Black woman, was shot and killed by LMPD officers March 13 during a failed narcotics investigation at her South End apartment.
"The objective and the goal is to disrupt just as much as (police) disrupt people's lives," said Chanelle Helm, a member of Black Lives Matter Louisville, which organized a march through downtown Sunday night. "I don't think anybody is really bothered by them. They decided they want to spend all type of money to keep coming out and interrupting and just assaulting people.
"They claim that they're worried about the laws, but they break the laws every time they get out there."
Halladay cited "an increase in aggressive behavior over the past week, including several incidents Saturday night," as the reason for Sunday's announcement.
Beginning Sunday, Halladay said, pedestrians will be required to stay on sidewalks, out of the streets, and to follow all pedestrian traffic laws. Cars and people on foot will not be allowed to block intersections, she said.
Around 7 p.m. Sunday, more than 150 people had gathered at the Muhammad Ali Center in downtown Louisville to organize for a march for Taylor and Michael Brown Jr., the latter of whom was fatally shot by police in Ferguson, Missouri, six years ago Sunday. Brown's father attended a protest in Louisville on Saturday.
Before the march, set to begin at 8 p.m. and go to Jefferson Square Park, organizers reminded the group that the demonstration would be peaceful and to be wary of police, given the new restrictions on protests. But those rules would not keep demonstrators from showing up and exercising their constitutionally protected rights, organizers said.
A police helicopter circled above, and organizers asked white participants to stand in front of Black marchers should they be confronted by police.
LMPD's move came less than 24 hours after protesters marched and drove through the Fourth Street Live entertainment district, where some people flipped tables and overturned chairs. Upon the protesters' return late Saturday to Jefferson Square Park — which has served as home base for the protests since they began May 28 — 12 people were arrested.
The tables and chairs had been put back in place and customers were back at Fourth Street Live on Sunday afternoon.
One incident Saturday night captured on video showed at least one protester kick a truck during the caravan, though people at the scene and speakers at a Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression press conference on Sunday morning said the driver had instigated the conflict by confronting the protesters.
"We were disappointed by the violence last night and deeply sorry for those who were impacted by scary, tense incidents," Mayor Greg Fischer said Sunday in a statement. "We continue to support peaceful protests — but if public safety is threatened, we will arrest those breaking the law, as evidenced by a dozen arrests last night and plans for stricter enforcement going forward."
Halladay said the police department "continues to balance the First Amendment right to protest with the public safety needs of the entire community." But protesters' vehicle and foot caravans have posed serious safety risks in prior weeks, she said, adding that reckless and dangerous behavior is frequent during the street demonstrations.
Louisville Metro Councilwoman Barbara Sexton Smith, D-4th District, who represents downtown, said Sunday night she supports "creative protesting and innovative civil disobedience," but she added, "Roadways are intended for traffic to be able to move."
"When we have people marching in the streets in a city bound up with one-way streets ... it has made it impossible for other citizens exercising their right in the public right of way to drive down the street," she said. "Where do you draw the line?"
Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, was part of a bipartisan group of council members who sent a letter to Fischer in late July demanding he create a list of expectations for protesters and enforce the laws.
On Sunday, Piagentini said the police announcement was "better late than never," but that he would have liked greater transparency. He also said Fischer's management of the police has led to unjust enforcement in some circumstances and a complete lack of enforcement in other areas.
Councilwoman Jessica Green, D-1st, however, said the change seems "outrageous" and that the timing of the change is "suspect," given the national group Until Freedom's recent presence.
There's nothing that stops LMPD from addressing dangerous situations, such as if vehicles are driving the wrong way on the road or driving recklessly, she said. But the department doesn't need to stop people from protesting in the streets.
"If the city has the resources to arrest people for protesting just because they're walking in the street or driving down the street, then this city has a lot more money than I thought we did," Green added.
Montez Jones, a local entertainer often present at the protests, said he and other leaders will encourage children and young people to follow the mandates.
But "we ain't stopping," he said, even if there are more citations and arrests. "We're marching tonight, and we're ready for anything to come our way."
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
Protesters told The Courier Journal their regular marches are intended to disrupt the city, and they will not stop protesting until the three officers who fired their weapons the night Breonna Taylor was killed face criminal charges.
Denorver Garrett led a group of protesters from Jefferson Square Park as they marched down Liberty Street on July 16, the 50th day of protests following the death of Breonna Taylor at the hands of LMPD.
$$$
