'It wasn't that bad'
Toran, Andre; Dahlia Ghabour,
25 Sep 2020
An eerie silence hung over the downtown Louisville streets Thursday afternoon.
Not a sound came from behind the barricades or dump trucks that cut off streets, the boarded-up windows of storefronts or the police and National Guardsmen who manned their posts.
Up and down Fourth Street in the heart of downtown, customers were nowhere in sight and store owners and employees occasionally poked their heads out of their boarded-up shops to see if anyone was coming in.
After protests following Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron's announcement that only one of the three police officers involved in the death of Breonna Taylor will face charges, and after a shooting that injured two Louisville Metro Police Department officers, it appeared business owners weren't anxious to open up shops in an area that's been blocked off by police for almost two days.
With windows boarded up in many locations and restaurants and business operating on shortened hours to accommodate the city's recently imposed curfew, one would think downtown Louisville was ready for trouble.
But according to local business owners who work in both downtown Louisville and the Highlands, where protesters also marched for racial justice on Wednesday, they didn't see much trouble or property damage at all.
From behind the counter at Sicilian Pizza & Pasta on South Fourth Street, an employee urged: "Don't believe what the news says. It wasn't bad at all (down here)!"
The overall sentiment was repeated by other business owners: It wasn't that bad.
Roughly a football field away from Sicilian, Mimi Kim stood in front of her store, Mimi's Wigs, with a leaf blower.
The hum and drum of air passing through the lime green and black neck of the machine was the only sound on the block. No talkative shoppers or the sounds of cars passing by. Just the leaf blower.
Kim, who opened her shop at 9:30 a.m., went to bed Wednesday night worried about what might happen to her shop if the protests reached it. She closed her shop early Wednesday and watched the store's cameras from her home until she fell asleep.
Upon her return Thursday, she was happy to find that no damage had been done.
"I understand that what's going on is not right," said Kim, who has lived in Louisville for 26 years and has owned her wig shop for the past three. "It's not fair, but what's going on has nothing to do with the small businesses. They shouldn't be destroyed."
By 1 p.m. Thursday, not one person had visited her shop nor had she made any sales for the day. Her concern from Wednesday night pivoted on Thursday to the impact that police precautions were now having on her business.
The barricades, police cars and National Guardsmen who manned the streets downtown, she says, ran her business dry for the day. No one wanted to shop under those conditions or any perceived threat the conditions posed.
"I have no customers. How are we going to survive?" she said.
Across the street, Brian Kim, Mimi's son and general manager of Brian's Deli, stood smiling, his mask falling below his chin. A couple of shoppers congregated on the corner near his family's store and he invited them in.
He and his father, who run the store, have seen more foot traffic in the deli than his mother's shop, but the pressure of the COVID-19 pandemic and the social unrest has had its toll. Sales for the store are down 60% to 70%, he said.
"I feel like most of the protesters are not really down with the looting," he said. "They are not really trying to incite any nonsensical violence. ... The people who are doing that, from what I have seen, are just opportunists trying to take advantage of a bad situation. So of course there is a little concern, but for the most part, there's nothing to worry about."
The scene was similarly quiet in the Highlands, where protesters marched after leaving downtown Louisville. A few more storefronts were boarded up, including T. Mobile and Murphy's Camera on Bardstown Road.
Kashmir Singh at Kashmir Indian Restaurant said he closed up shop a little early Wednesday and was planning to do the same Thursday. An employee at Heart & Soy said the same, and that protesters mostly "just walked by" last night when marching.
Nicholas Huzl, general manager of The Joy Luck, said some people overturned tables, "broke a few water glasses and verbally accosted an employee" yesterday around 3:30 p.m., and the restaurant was closed up shortly after. Though no lasting damage was done beyond the broken glasses, Huzl said he was surprised it happened during broad daylight.
"If you want to march up and down Bardstown Road that's fine, but stay in the roadway and don't damage property," Huzl said. "I get everybody's upset but it's not the way to go about bringing change in the right manner. We're just trying to do the best we can by our employees and our community. It just sucks being attacked by people who may or may not have even been from Louisville."
Huzl said someone had broken the window up the block at Big Mike's Shaved Ice and he went over to tape it up. On Thursday afternoon, the kiosk was boarded up. But besides that, up and down Bardstown Road, the only debris on the sidewalk were fallen leaves. Just next door to The Joy Luck, someone had placed rose petals in the shape of a heart on the sidewalk outside Ramsi's Cafe on the World and Carmichael's Bookstore.
A little farther down the street, Parkside Bikes co-owner Jimmy Flaherty had propped his shop door open, feet away from the intersection where LMPD officers clashed with protesters Wednesday.
"Everything would have been fine if the cops had just let them march to McConnell's house or wherever they were going," Flaherty said. "As usual, the cops incited violence. We had a discussion about boarding up, but the way I look at it is it's going against what the Black Lives Matter movement is trying to do. It's just exacerbating the fearmongering aspect of it if you board up your windows. At the end of the day, it's just stuff, and it's not worth more than lives."
Contact Andre Toran: atoran@gannett.com; Twitter @andretoran. Contact Dahlia Ghabour at 502-582-4497; dghabour@gannett.com; Twitter: @dghabour.
A mail carrier delivers mail by tossing it over a wooden barrier at a business on Fourth Street in downtown Louisville on Thursday morning. A sign on the plywood read: "Postman – Please toss mail over the barricade." Local businesses said there wasn't much damage after protests Wednesday night.
Matt Stone/Courier Journal
Protesters left rose petals in the shape of a heart on the sidewalk outside Ramsi's Cafe on the World and Carmichael's Bookstore.
$$$
