Place-based police unit tied to death: 'Rogue' squad or targeted initiative?
Duvall, Tessa; Kachmar, Kala; Costello, Darcy
03 Aug 2020
"We felt it would be pretty successful, so we were looking forward to rolling it out to the public with our successes. I just don't think we really had an opportunity for that to happen."
LaVita Chavous
Deputy police chief
Louisville's newly formed Place-Based Investigations unit was thrust into the spotlight this month after a lawsuit filed in the Breonna Taylor shooting labeled it a "rogue police unit" formed to target people and homes on Elliott Avenue.
Lawyers for Taylor's family argued the LMPD unit "went on a crusade," using a narcotics investigation to kick people out of homes to make way for a "high dollar, legacy-creating" real estate project.
That project, her lawyers say, led officers to Taylor's front door March 13 because of her alleged — and disputed — affiliation with a main target in the narcotics investigation who lived in one of the homes in the project's path.
Louisville officials have bristled at the charge, dismissing it as a "false narrative." LMPD leaders argue that the police's Place-Based Investigations unit is a tool to reduce violent crime.
"We knew we needed something that had a more long-term effect at ... getting rid of some of our problem locations," Deputy Chief LaVita Chavous told The Courier Journal.
But unlike other communities that have launched similar programs, LMPD did little to publicize the roll-out of its Place-Based Investigations Unit — leaving questions about what, exactly, its purpose is.
The questions have only intensified after it was revealed that the "no-knock" warrant police used to force their way into Taylor's apartment, leading to her death, was obtained by a member of the Place-Based Investigative team.
Louisville Metro Council members have vowed that their investigation into the Fischer administration's handling of the Taylor case, the death of David West End barbecue operator McAtee and LMPD's response to protests will include a look at the unit.
Council President David James, D-6th District, said in a July 9 news conference that he and other council members knew an effort was under way to "clean up the area," but he said he wasn't aware of a police unit "focusing on that area to do X, Y or Z."
Place-Based Investigative unit's first assignment: Elliot Avenue Elliott Avenue was the first area of focus for Louisville's relatively new program, city officials confirmed to The Courier Journal. The street was chosen in large part, police said, because of its high levels of violent crime and calls for service.
An added plus, officials said, was that Develop Louisville -- the city's real estate and community development agency -- already had been involved in the neighborhood, focusing on vacant and abandoned properties in a few city blocks.
Documents released by Fischer's administration show the police squad worked closely with other city agencies to target a suspected drug den connected to the Taylor case, later transferred to the city's Landbank Authority.
"Strike 3," an LMPD detective wrote to city officials with the Codes and Regulations department in April, following drug charges connected to the house.
Louisville's interim police chief wrote in an opinion piece published in The Courier Journal that it was "simply not true" that any law enforcement on Elliott Avenue was directed by city leaders to gain control of property.
"At no time did Develop Louisville ask LMPD to perform a raid on 2424 Elliott Ave. Nor did LMPD ask Develop Louisville's opinion on any of its investigations," interim Chief Robert Schroeder wrote.
"The enforcement effort was a police action to address criminal activity — period."
Here's what to know about the Place-Based Investigative unit and its connection to Taylor's death:
Where did the Place-Based Investigations unit originate? The unit is based at least loosely on a strategy from the Cincinnati Police Department and a University of Nevada Las Vegas-based criminologist, Tamara Herold.
The concept, known as Place-Based Investigations of Violent Offender Territories, or PIVOT, is a violence-reduction strategy that addresses small areas, or microlocations, where crime is chronic and sustained.
It uses data to identify the places and relies on a board that includes police, city department heads and community organizations to review police investigations into the people and places contributing to ongoing violence there.
For example, in the first "micro-location" identified in Cincinnati, officials removed unused public parking spaces used by drug dealers, according to the department's site report.
"It makes crime a less attractive option, blocks the opportunity for violent behavior and helps eliminate the physical facilitators that might contribute to these crime problems," Herold said. "We know that arrests and police presence and enforcement efforts can drive down crime. But it's not a sustainable strategy."
Cincinnati also added lighting to a quiet, dark part of a street where neighbors said car-to-car drug deals take place. They demolished several blighted properties and worked with property owners to improve three homes that had a history of code violations, health complaints and drugs.
Cincinnati's development team, using crime and calls for service data, found 23 places — comprising 1.4% of the city's land — where 43% of all shootings took place.
"I was blown away by the degree to which (violence) was clustered," said Herold, who grew up in Cincinnati. "We found the same thing in city after city.
Herold said one major key to success is transparency, which includes community input. She said it wasn't difficult to get buy-in from the community.
"We change the dynamic so citizens can take control of their community, take ownership, invest and feel safe," she said.
Four years in, reports from the city's targeted sites showed significant decreases in shootings, violent crimes and blight, with little evidence that the crime had just been pushed elsewhere.
How did Louisville get involved? LMPD officials heard about the model in May 2019 and were eager to get more information, according to a timeline provided by the city. Police brought the strategy to the mayor's office to see if it might be feasible in Louisville.
The cities discussed working together, and Cincinnati was in the process of securing grant funding to provide training and technical assistance. But they haven't been able to bring the full model in Louisville or engage in training.
No other cities have rolled out the strategy in full, but the Las Vegas Police Department conducted a test site — and now plans to implement it across the city.
Herold said a partnership would involve helping a city identify problem locations, putting together an effective board and providing training for investigators and board members.
"We all realized that what we were doing wasn't working as effectively and as efficiently as it could be," Chavous said.
Louisville police puts its unit into place By December, Louisville's unit had begun work.
A timeline released by Fischer's administration shows that in late 2019, the unit had "identified multiple individuals suspected of dealing drugs out of one or more homes" on Elliott Avenue.
Over the next several months, police and city agencies including the Office of Community Development and Codes and Regulations would have several interactions with residents on that block.
Chavous told The Courier Journal Wednesday the department intends to move forward with the unit's efforts and is putting together a board to look at potential targeted areas comprehensively.
"We felt it would be pretty successful, so we were looking forward to rolling it out to the public with our successes. I just don't think we really had an opportunity for that to happen," Chavous said.
How is Elliott Avenue tied to PBI? Police identified eight potential locations for the squad to focus on before selecting Elliott Avenue, Chavous said.
The department determined that site was where PBI's efforts could have great impact because of outreach and enforcement already underway, Chavous said. Police evaluated the locations based on violent felony crimes and calls for service.
"That looked to be the area that would have the most success or the most impact for the community," she said of Elliott Avenue.
At least part of that existing work was Develop Louisville's focus on vacant and abandoned properties in the area, officials said, which dates back to roughly 2015.
Chavous did not provide the exact boundaries of the "micro-location site" the unit focused on but said it included 24th Street and Elliott Avenue, as well as 26th Street and Broadway.
The latter address is where a member of the Kentucky National Guard fatally shot McAtee, 53, at his barbecue stand June 1 after police and the Guard were dispatched to disperse a crowd.
Officials say ballistic evidence and security cameras show that McAtee fired at least two rounds from his 9mm handgun that night; two National Guard and two Louisville police officers fired at least 19 shots in response. One round hit McAtee in the chest, killing him.
Chavous said the area's selection had no bearing on why police and Guard members were sent to 26th Street and Broadway the night McAtee died, saying "those are two separate issues."
At 2424 Elliott Ave., records show police began targeting the home months before the investigation would lead to Taylor's front door.
On Jan. 22, the city notified the home's owner, Law Mar Inc. and Gerald Happle, that criminal activity "constituting a public nuisance" had occurred at his property in December, and that further violations would result in the home being deemed a public nuisance, records show.
Among those arrested there was Jamarcus Glover, a convicted felon with a years-long history of trafficking and drug arrests.
A week after the city's letter, Happle wrote back that he would evict the tenants if they could not work out a solution and asked if the city has "any program to purchase or accept donations of problem properties."
After speaking with Happle by phone Feb. 17, a code enforcement officer wrote in an email to all five police officers of the PBI unit that if further illegal activity occurs, "he will then donate the property to Metro after evicting the tenant."
One of those PBI officers was Detective Joshua Jaynes who on March 12 requested search warrants with no-knock clauses for five properties: Taylor's apartment, three homes on Elliott Avenue and a home on West Muhammad Ali Boulevard.
Circuit Court Judge Mary Shaw signed all five warrants, and police executed the ones for Taylor's apartment and Elliott Avenue after midnight March 13. Glover was arrested without incident, but the warrant executed at Taylor's apartment ended with an officer shot and Taylor left dead in her hallway from five bullets fired by officers.
Police alleged that Taylor may have been holding money and drugs for Glover. Sam Aguiar, an attorney for Taylor's family, disputes that, saying that while Glover and Taylor had dated years earlier, they had no more than a "passive friendship."
After Glover's arrest, the city wrote to Happle on March 17, notifying him that the home had been formally deemed a public nuisance. The next day he called to ask about donating the house.
Happle signed the donation application and returned it to the city by April 6.
On April 8, Detective Kelly Goodlett of the Place-Based Investigations unit wrote to the city's public nuisance and Metro 311 email accounts, documenting the property's latest infraction — it's "strike 3."
Two hours before Goodlett wrote the note, officers stopped a vehicle for an improper turn after watching its occupants go into 2424 Elliott for a short time. Officers found crack cocaine on the driver.
The city followed up with Happle, issuing a $400 citation and an order to vacate the home April 13. By then, Happle had already given his renters 14 days to vacate on March 21 and had signed the application to donate the home.
On June 5 — what would have been Taylor's 27th birthday — he signed over the deed.
The city paid $1 for the house.
Darcy Costello: 502-582-4834; dcostello@courier-journal.com; Twitter: @dctello. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/darcyc.
"We felt it would be pretty successful, so we were looking forward to rolling it out to the public with our successes. I just don't think we really had an opportunity for that to happen."
LaVita Chavous
Deputy police chief
$$$
