Taylor's case to be examined in special on FX, Hulu
Aulbach, Lucas
04 Sep 2020
An hourlong TV special digging into the case of Breonna Taylor is set to air this weekend.
"The Killing of Breonna Taylor," a documentary produced by The New York Times, will be shown at 10 p.m. Friday on FX and will be available on Hulu.
The show examines Taylor's death — she was shot and killed in her apartment in March by Louisville Metro Police officers executing a no-knock warrant in a case that has ignited months of protests in Kentucky and across the nation — but also gives the audience a closer look at who she was as a person, according to local anti-violence activist Christopher 2X.
Among those interviewed, 2X said, include Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, her boyfriend Kenneth Walker, several other family members, classmates and co-workers from her time working as an emergency room technician.
Several city and local police officials declined to be interviewed, 2X said, though Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine and Metro Council President David James took part in the film.
The documentary is expected to take a closer look at the controversial no-knock search warrant that was approved as part of the case, as well as how Taylor's death relates to the war on drugs and its wide-reaching impact on society over the past several decades.
2X said he's spoken to Palmer, who said she appreciates the effort the documentary takes to shed more light on her daughter's case.
Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, who will announce whether the officers involved in Taylor's death will face charges, said Sunday that his office had received a long-awaited ballistics report on the incident from the FBI. No decision is expected this week, he added.
Lucas Aulbach can be reached at laulbach@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4649 or on Twitter @LucasAulbach. Support strong local journalism and subscribe: courier-journal.com/lucasa.
A billboard depicting Breonna Taylor is posted near Dixie Hwy. and Brick Kiln Lane.
$$$
