where do we go from here?
Loosemore, Bailey; Schneider, Grace; Adams, Kirby; Ladd, Sarah
07 June 2020
Where do we go from here?
After four nights of protests in response to the death of Breonna Taylor — during which stores were looted and seven people were shot — it's a question that's come to the top of many minds.
The Courier Journal spent May 31 speaking with more than a dozen community leaders and members about what they think needs to happen next for the city to move forward.
Here's what they said.
Neeli Bendapudi, president of the University of Louisville "We have a long way left to go as a country, commonwealth, city and university. ZIP codes cannot dictate education, health and well being, inter-generational wealth transfers — and they do, now. It is important that we use this moment to take an honest, uncomfortable look at the systemic drivers of inequity and address them. At the university, we need to do the same.
"Community leaders need to make sure that the fierce urgency of now is not quickly forgotten."
Rev. Frank Smith, Interdenominational Ministerial Coalition Louisville's protests are "a consequence of people who have ignored the persistent cries from the black community.
"This city rushes to complete the projects and developments that suit its wealthy and its affluent, especially those east of Ninth Street."
Meanwhile, infrastructure is halted and delayed in the West End. Windows are boarded up regularly, he said.
Smith called for Louisville to create a government aid program that would be "singularly focused, priority funding for the development of the black communities of Louisville."
"We have not progressed any further over 400 years because there are policies that continue to put the knee on the neck of the black community," Smith said.
Angela Parsons, principal of the J. Graham Brown School Vandals involved in this weekend's protests made it clear it didn't matter what they were destroying when they spray painted and smashed windows at the Brown School.
Sunday, as Jefferson County Public School employees worked to erase the vulgarity and destruction from the property, the school's leader reassured students, parents and alumni of the value of human life over physical objects.
"Our school is not this building, our school is made up of a diverse body of beautiful souls," Parsons wrote in a Facebook post Sunday morning. "Some of our school family is suffering as are members of our greater community. The suffering of people angers me, not this vandalism."
The Brown School, which teaches kindergarten through 12th grade, is home to 743 students, 30% of whom are African American.
"It is my great honor to care for these children for 13 years," Parsons told the Courier Journal. "From the beginning of their time at this school until they graduate, we teach racial equity. And moving forward, we will continue to adhere to those values and the belief that every life matters and deserves to be heard, respected and valued."
Jecorey Arthur, Metro Council District 4 candidate "It will be impossible as a city or a state or a country to move forward in the future if we don't address and redress and resolve our past.
"It's going to take a holistic, systematic reset. Not only organizing in the streets, but also organizing in the classroom."
Change won't happen overnight, Arthur said, using the example of a hurt thumb.
"It took less than a second for my thumb to get damaged but days for it to heal. ... Imagine how long it will take after 400 years" of injustice against black people, he said. "The work we're doing now, I may have to pass off to my 2-year-old. He might be marching in 50 years like we are this week."
Stephen George, president and general manager of Louisville Public Media George was on the hunt for plywood Saturday after windows at the historic Louisville Public Media building were shattered amid Friday's protest.
While plywood was important in the short term, George said he's more focused on the long-term ramifications of the weekend protests and how his media outlet can work to build a stronger community.
"From my perspective as a business leader in the city and as a white person, I think it is very important to listen to what our black friends are saying right now, both on the streets during these protests and in our daily lives," he said.
One way Louisville Public Media has already been working to ensure all voices in Louisville are being heard by tracking the diversity of its sources and how they represent those sources.
"It's just one way that we hold ourselves accountable to our mission," he said, "the mission of being representative of the voices throughout our entire community and to be equitable in how we report on our community."
Sarah Burbank, MacKenna Williams and Jacob Grant, South Oldham High students "We talk about this like the rioting is not American," said Burbank, 17. "But a police system that's not accountable to anything is not American either... The most un-American thing that we could possibly have is a police system where it was ever allowed that they could just go into someone's house, and then that person could end up dead in the middle of the night."
After attending Saturday's protest, the high school students swept glass from Fourth Street on Sunday.
The protests were about peace and unity, they said. They came from a place of hurt and "generations of terrorism."
Williams said her brother, who is Guatemalan, is already scared to go out at night for fear of running into police officers.
And Grant said he was always told "don't go west of nine." Instead, through his work with the Kentucky YMCA program, he volunteered in the West End. He wanted to understand the separation, he said, and to understand what "100 years of redlining" does to a city.
"It's really hard to see that and look at like, this is where I live. ... I'm benefiting from (this) system," he said.
Bayley Amburgey, recent graduate of the University of Louisville Ahead of Friday's protest, Amburgey made a call for monetary donations on her Instagram. She gathered $1,000 in less than a few hours, which she spent on water and other supplies for the hundreds of protesters who eventually hit the city's streets.
The 21-year-old was overwhelmed by the show of support that the donations provided. But she was also overwhelmed by what she saw as the protest turned chaotic.
White men intentionally provoked the police, she said, and refused to stop after she and her friends begged them to.
A woman fell to the ground after being hit with a tear gas canister. Amburgey attempted to help by bringing the woman a mix of water and baking soda. But her throat began to close up, and she struggled to breathe. She had to leave.
Amburgey's advice now to other young people and everyone who's angry is to educate themselves before marching into the streets.
"Go to things that Black Lives Matter sponsors," she said. "They are adhering to the nonviolent principles. They've been trained by the people before us. ... If we're going to keep protesting, we have to be strategized and be organized. We have to be deliberate and intentional with every action that we do.
"It makes no sense to put black bodies in front of the police with no plan."
Amburgey said she's participated in activist training through Black Lives Matter Louisville, and she encourages others to do the same.
Because even after the protests are over, the work won't be done.
"This is also a system that we're trying to take down," she said. "We have to remember, this is a greater scheme."
David Jones Jr., former JCPS board member The turmoil of the late 1960s and the efforts of the Kerner Commission to investigate the causes of the 1967 race riots came to mind for businessman David Jones Jr.
"I hear the unheeded warnings of the Kerner Commission that 'our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white — separate and unequal.' I hear Langston Hughes' searing italics telling us that a dream too long deferred will explode," Jones said.
"The only today wisdom I can quote comes from Killer Mike's plea to Atlanta: 'It is not time to burn down your own home (but) to plot, plan, strategize, organize and mobilize ... If we burn down Atlanta, what have we got?' If we burn down Louisville, what have we got?"
Christy Brown, philanthropist Brown, who owns the Republic Building on Fifth Street downtown, said she went to the property Saturday morning to meet a crew that was boarding it up. Nearby, the crew built a box around a statue of Mother Catherine Spalding to keep it safe from any damage.
"We are a resilient enough community to figure out how to translate what's happened into methods of learning and transformation," Brown said.
"We must make sure our whole city understands this pain. We can't be a city where people don't feel safe because they are black — or any other reason. It's important that we all see it and say it out loud. We can't skip this step and our police must understand deeply that they are an essential part of the solutions."
Aaron Thompson, president of the Council on Postsecondary Education "The Council on Postsecondary Education is committed to the principles of diversity, equity and inclusion. In the aftermath of the senseless deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Louisville native Breonna Taylor, we are called upon to deepen this commitment. We are called upon to act," Thompson said.
"Racism has no place in a civilized society. The inequities in our criminal justice system, in income, and in health care are in large part due to inequities in our educational systems. We can no longer accept disparities in educational attainment due to race, income or ethnicity. Kentucky's higher education system must increase access and success for every single one of us.
CPE has implemented a diversity policy that requires campuses to close achievement gaps and create more inclusive campus climates.
This means teaching students to examine our history with a critical lens, to value opposing viewpoints and to treat everyone with respect. We are prepared to do more by developing a certification process for cultural competence.
Higher education increases our ability to approach situations with reason, empathy and creativity. It is a powerful force against prejudice and fear. We have an opportunity to emerge from this moment as a more just and equitable society. The council pledges to use its power — as a convener and policy maker — to heal these divides and work for constructive change."
$$$
