Controversial statue of Castleman gone
Tobin, Ben
09 June 2020
"This is a legacy of the history of oppression in this country of black Americans"
Carla Wallace,
Member of Louisville Showing Up for Racial Justice
For 107 years, the bronze statue of John B. Castleman astride his horse has been firmly planted overlooking Louisville's famed Cherokee Triangle.
No longer.
Shortly after 6 a.m. Monday, without announcement or fanfare, city workers quickly worked to take down the controversial statue of the former Confederate major and champion of Louisivllle's parks system, hauling it off to storage.
The city's new plan is to place the statue at Cave Hill Cemetery, where Castleman is interred, and with it bury years of division over whether the monument glorifies a treasonous bid to preserve slavery or honors a man who fought the segregation of the city's parks.
Castleman did both, fighting as a major in the Confederate army, then, after the war, renouncing his role and speaking out against attempts to ban African Americans from the Olmsted parks.
Mayor Greg Fischer, who has wanted the statue gone for several years, pointed to the wave of protests over the police shootings of Breonna Taylor and David McAtee as more evidence that Castleman's effigy had to go.
"The events of the past weeks have shown clearly that it's not enough just to face our history — we've got to address its impact on our present," Fischer said Monday.
"Too many people are suffering today because the promises of justice and equality enshrined in our Constitution are unfulfilled by a society that devalues African American lives and denies African Americans justice, opportunity and equity. That's got to change."
A lawsuit filed in 2019 by a Louisville arts group had stymied Fischer's attempts to move the statue — but on Friday, a Jefferson Circuit judge agreed that it could come down. And Fischer jumped on the opportunity.
Negotiations with Cave Hill on the statue are ongoing, the city said, and no decision has been made on how the Cherokee Triangle site will be used in the future.
Castleman's complicated past Constructed in 1913, the 15-foot-high statue has drawn controversy in recent years and has been a target for vandals because of Castleman's time in the Confederate army serving under John Hunt Morgan, the notorious leader of Morgan's Raiders.
Born 20 years before the Civil War, Castleman grew up on his family's estate, Castleton, near Lexington, in a mansion "colonial and commodious," he wrote in his autobiography, "Active Service 19," published in 1917, the year before his death.
Castleman dropped out of school at the age of 20 to join the Confederate Army, rising the ranks to become a major. In 1916, Castleman renounced the Confederate cause, and during World War I, he condemned three white soldiers who refused to salute a black captain.
He died in 1918.
A century later, Fischer announced his intention to remove the statue.
"Although John B. Castleman made civic contributions to Louisville, he also fought to keep men, women and children bonded in the chains of slavery and touted his role in the Civil War in his autobiography years later," Fischer said in May 2019, after the city's Landmarks Commission voted 5-3 to allow the city to move the statue.
Stephen Porter, who filed a lawsuit for Friends of Louisville Public Art, the Louisville Historical League and several individuals last year over the city's decision to remove the statue, said Monday that with the removal, Fischer's administration "has shown it has no regard for the requirements of the judicial system."
Porter said Monday he is filing a motion this week for the Jefferson Circuit Court to vacate or overturn its decision allowing the city to remove the Castleman statue.
"The circuit court failed to consider the major points of law contained in our original complaint, and we will ask the court to reconsider," Porter said in a statement. "Failing that, my clients then have a 30-day period to file an appeal to the Kentucky Court of Appeals.
"Louisville Metro has no right to remove the Castleman statue until all court processes are exhausted."
In response to Porter's statement, Fischer said Monday afternoon that the attorney "certainly has the right" to file a motion for the court to vacate or overturn the decision.
Statue removal draws mixed reviews from witnesses Several area residents and activists came to Cherokee Triangle on Monday morning to watch the statue being removed. One of them was Louisville Metro Councilman Brandon Coan, D-8th District, who has lobbied it taken down.
"I'm really glad to see it was taken down and how easily it was taken down, because you can obviously imagine situations where it came down (in) a very different, loud, violent, messy way," said Coan, whose district includes Cherokee Triangle.
"People are demanding action, and not just words," Coan said of recent protests. "And this is a silent, quiet act that speaks volumes, and we need to see a lot more things like this going forward for a long time."
Another person at the site Monday morning, Carla Wallace, brought a sign that said "Take It Down." The member of Louisville Showing Up for Racial Justice said she has been working for three years to get the statue removed.
"This is a legacy of the history of oppression in this country of black Americans," Wallace said. "It's a legacy of slavery and a legacy of the continued issues that we're struggling with today."
Some said that the city needs to do more to help the African American community beyond removing the Castleman statue.
"We don't need our city taking down symbols of white supremacy," Jecorey Arthur, a local activist, educator and musician, wrote in a tweet Monday. "We need our city taking down systems of white supremacy.
"While we're removing this, let's remove no-knock warrants, cash bail and the increase to LMPD weapons in the upcoming budget," continued Arthur, who is also running as a Democrat for Metro Council's 4th District.
Confederate monuments targeted The removal of the statue comes as a wave of elected officials have announced their intentions to remove Confederate monuments amid protests nationwide.
On Thursday, Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear said the statue of Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy and a Kentucky native, should be removed from the Rotunda of the state Capitol building in Frankfort.
"I believe (the statue) is a symbol that divides us, and it no longer – and to me, it never – had a place in a Rotunda that's supposed to honor people," Beshear said during a Monday press briefing.
With the Castleman statue gone, will Kentucky remove Jefferson Davis from the state Capitol? 3A
"This is a legacy of the history of oppression in this country of black Americans"
Carla Wallace,
Member of Louisville Showing Up for Racial Justice
The John B. Castleman statue in Louisville's Cherokee Triangle neighborhood was removed from its pedestal where it stood for over 100 years. The statue to the controversial Castleman has been vandalized often over the last 10 years.
A worker places cones on the platform where the statue stood.
$$$
