Southern Baptist leader under fire
Kobin, Billy
13 June 2020
A Christian social justice organization wants the Louisville-based Southern Baptist Theological Seminary to fire its president, R. Albert Mohler Jr., for his "failure to condemn systemic racism and police violence" in recent comments.
Faithful America, which claims more than 160,000 members from every major Christian denomination, has collected over 11,000 signatures on its online petition that was posted Monday and addressed to the trustees of the Louisville seminary.
The petition takes offense at what Mohler said during a June 3 episode of his daily podcast, "The Briefing," when the evangelical leader discussed President Donald Trump's photo op two days earlier with a Bible outside of St. John's Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C.
To clear a path for Trump that day, authorities forced out peaceful protesters who were calling attention to the death of George Floyd while in Lafayette Square, which is between the White House and the historic church.
Images of the dispersal and Trump's resulting photo op caused further division in a nation already reeling from days of protests over the deaths of Floyd and other black Americans at the hands of police.
What did Mohler say? Mohler said during his podcast that the meaning of Trump holding up a Bible outside of the church "isn't clear. And that's part of the problem."
He proceeded to recap the incident and how some White House sources say it was meant to "demonstrate courage and toughness" and also affirm religious liberty.
"The problem right now is that America needs not only showmanship, it desperately does need statesmanship, and it needs a president who will perform the actions and speak the words that are going to build up the nation and its trust as we go through a very troubling time," Mohler said.
"And one of the challenges for supporters of the president in this context is understanding that it is so easy for the president himself to walk on his own message in the midst of trying to convey something substantially or symbolically in this context of American life."
Mohler acknowledged he was "left with a bit of befuddlement myself" over the photo op before adding that "a significant sector of the media is going to continue to show these kinds of visions over and over and over again, as if they make a self-evident point against the president."
The Southern Baptist leader then quickly turned to Trump's comments over using the Insurrection Act to quell protests and said it was "not an irrational statement."
"As you're looking at the mayhem and chaos on American streets, and you're looking at the images that came in overnight of widespread looting and insurrection in those streets, it is clear that our national political order cannot stand this kind of uncertainty, and mayhem, and violence and disorder," Mohler said.
Mohler, a conservative who helped push out liberal and moderate faculty members at Southern Baptist Theological Seminary when he became president in 1993, also said the photo op had "ironies abounding."
One of them is how Trump stood outside of St. John's Episcopal Church, part of a denomination that Mohler said has "increasingly moved itself to the far left of American theology and American public life."
"It has been openly affirming LGBTQ, and you could just go through the list of the issues of liberal activism for a matter of decades," Mohler said, adding that the Episcopal church has been "hemorrhaging members" and is "likely to go the way of the dodo."
What does the petition say? Faithful America says Mohler used Trump's photo op "as an excuse to ignore black lives" during his podcast.
"Dr. Albert Mohler's failure to condemn systemic racism and police violence in his recent daily podcasts — despite his condemnation of protesters — enables white supremacy and ignores the God-given dignity of black lives," the petition says. "This failure is made even more conspicuous by Dr. Mohler's use of President Trump's St. John's photo op to change the topic away from racism and to an unprovoked attack on the Episcopal Church."
The petition also refers to Mohler's comments in a 1998 interview with CNN's Larry King, when the Baptist leader said that while the Bible does not endorse slavery, it does require slaves to obey their masters.
After that interview resurfaced last month, Mohler told the Religion News Service he made an "incredibly stupid comment" and "I repudiate the statements I made."
But the Faithful America petition declares that Mohler's recent podcast coupled with his "past defense of slavery" make it "apparent that he is unfit to serve as president of a major Christian institution, particularly one in a city racked by the murder of Breonna Taylor."
Louisville police officers fatally shot Taylor, a 26-year-old black woman, while serving a drug-related warrant at her South End apartment in March.
No drugs were recovered, and protesters have since chanted her name at the demonstrations around the country.
"As your fellow Christians, we call on the Board of Trustees of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary to immediately fire Dr. Mohler as president," the petition concludes.
Apart from its most recent petition, Faithful America has also called for Mohler's removal from the nonpartisan Gospel Coalition, a group of pastors and elders.
That demand came as Mohler has faced criticism for saying he will vote for Trump this year after denouncing him four years ago as "beneath the baseline of human decency."
How did Mohler respond to the petition? Mohler was "not available to talk" about the petition, a spokesman told The Courier Journal.
Caleb Shaw, director of communications for Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, sent the following statement:
"Dr. Albert Mohler has consistently condemned racism his entire tenure at Southern Seminary and has been a leader in the Southern Baptist Convention in condemning the sin of racism in any form. This so-called petition is a bald-faced lie originating from a far-left organization that has no regard for truth. The effort was then fueled by internet trolls. It deserves no further comment."
$$$
