Taylor's image to be on Vanity Fair cover
Ladd, Sarah
26 Aug 2020
In a flowing blue dress and with a golden cross around her neck, Breonna Taylor's likeness graces the cover of a special September issue of Vanity Fair magazine.
The issue is called "The Great Fire," an ode to a poem "inspired by the belief among white Chicagoans that the first Great Migration to the city was 'the worst calamity that had struck the city since the Great Fire' of 1871, which took hundreds of lives and burned out the heart of the city," according to writer and the issue's guest editor, Ta-Nehisi Coates.
"I don't know how else to comprehend the jackboots bashing in Breonna Taylor's door and spraying her home with bullets, except the belief that they were fighting some Great Fire — demonic, unnatural, inhuman," Coates wrote in an article about the issue.
The edition also features a story from the perspective of Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, and more on the protest movement.
The cover art is by Amy Sherald, the artist who famously painted former first lady Michelle Obama's 2018 portrait for the National Portrait Gallery.
"She sees you seeing her," Sherald is quoted as saying in a Vanity Fair article about the process of creating the cover. "The hand on the hip is not passive, her gaze is not passive. She looks strong! I wanted this image to stand as a piece of inspiration to keep fighting for justice for her. When I look at the dress, it kind of reminds me of Lady Justice."
The dress, specifically designed for this cover by designer Jasmine Elder, is blue in a nod to Taylor's birthstone. On Taylor's left hand is a rendering of the engagement ring she "would never get to wear."
This isn't the first major magazine to lend its platform to amplifying Taylor's story. In July, it was announced that O, The Oprah Magazine, in a first, wouldn't feature the famous namesake's face. Instead, it featured a rendering of Taylor for its September issue, which hit stands on Aug. 11 and quickly sold out around Louisville.
Breonna Taylor's portrait on the cover of the September Vanity Fair is by Amy Sherald.
Amy Sherald/Vanity Fair
$$$
