Organic organization has defined Louisville's racial justice protests
Gardner, Hayes
12 July 2020
"It's always different people, and what I love about it is that. It really is a leader-less movement. I just think it is beautiful. It is collaborative."
Cynthia Ganote
Protester and a professor of sociology at the University of Louisville who teaches a course on race in the U.S.
In the 30 minutes after police and protesters faced off in downtown Louisville on Tuesday night, following the arrest of two demonstrators, a half-dozen people amplified their voices with a bullhorn.
Some protesters demanded that others stop lighting firecrackers. Some displayed disdain for the police, who had arrested a woman after she threw water onto an officer. Some simply wanted to prepare for the upcoming march.
Two protest leaders got into an argument, which was settled off to the side, and another took to the megaphone once more: "We are frustrated. But at the end of the day, we're all family," he explained. "United we stand. Divided we fall."
The setting for Louisville's daily protests for racial justice is fairly easily defined; Jefferson Square Park is the nucleus of activity. The cast of characters is plain to identify, too, as scores and sometimes hundreds of protesters take to the streets each night.
But the protagonist of the protest? That's more difficult to pin down.
Demonstrations in response to the killing of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police have continued now for 45 days, but it hasn't been a single organization or even one set of leaders that has propelled the daily protests. Rather, it's been a multitude of forces — community organizations, Facebook Live streamers, a troupe of concerned and passionate citizens with tireless voices and legs — that have banded together to will the protests on.
Some protesters give educational speeches before marches and plan the routes, while others have created pop-up advocacy groups; some pass out crackers and Gatorade during the marches, while others organize bail money.
It takes a village to patchwork a protest.
"It's always different people, and what I love about it is that. It really is a leader-less movement," said Cynthia Ganote, a protester and a professor of sociology at the University of Louisville who teaches a course on race in the U.S. "I just think it is beautiful. It is collaborative."
It can create confusion and uncertainty at times, but still, each night, protesters assemble at Jefferson Square Park — called Injustice Square Park by some activists — and unite in disputes with police and in marches across the city. They organize cars to block intersections, distribute food and water, and continuously chant.
It's part of protests over police brutality in all 50 states over the past two months, sometimes called the Black Lives Matter movement. But while the marchers in Louisville certainly do believe that Black lives matter, in lowercase letters, the daily protests are not officially planned by Black Lives Matter Louisville, the formal organization.
BLM Louisville focuses more on policy work and does take some direct action, such as blocking traffic and displaying a massive Breonna Taylor banner from the Second Street Bridge on June 29, but the marches that begin at Jefferson Square Park each night are unaffiliated.
Talesha Wilson, a BLM Louisville organizer, said the daily downtown marches are important, though, and that they work in conjunction with BLM's political activism.
"I think that people still have to make noise," Wilson said. "People can work in harmony, separately."
The initial night of protests, May 28, was a grassroots operation from the outset, generated from word of mouth and Facebook Live videos. And out of those grassroots sprouted varying ideologies as a flurry of individuals and emotions and strategies inundated downtown.
Looters and rioters, separate from the peaceful protesters marching in Breonna Taylor's name, grabbed national attention in the early days as they smashed storefronts throughout downtown. Varying levels of aggression continued for the first few days, further sparked by David McAtee's death at the hands of the National Guard.
"We were all managing ourselves," activist Cassia Herron said of the early days of protests, "and trying to figure out how we stop people from arguing and how we stop people from wanting to rush the police, literally. Folks were like, 'Hey, there are more of us than there are of them. F--- them. They can't kill us all.'"
Shameka Parrish-Wright, co-chair of the Kentucky Alliance Against Racist and Political Oppression, said she had to work through disagreements with other groups and individuals.
"There have been some challenges because you got people who are — there's no other way to say it — they're ready to burn it down, right?" she said, noting that changes in Minneapolis policing following aggressive protests have resonated with some. "To me, that looks like answers to people."
However, time and common goals have allowed protest leaders to align, for the most part, and spearhead marches through the city for six weeks now.
Each day, a group of leaders decides on a route, and before each march, a leader reviews protocol with the demonstrators — including how to deescalate a situation when someone on the march hints they may be destructive.
"All of that was organic," Parrish-Wright said of the protests developing. "As we grew, we had to have meetings daily."
One of the most vocal and visible protesters, Montez Jones, has led chants for each of the past six weeks and greets everyone he sees with a clenched, raised fist. But even he, like so many others, is simply a concerned civilian with no history of protesting or organizing.
He was prodded by a friend to attend the first day of protests and encouraged others to, as well, but then he kept coming back. Now, he's a de facto activist.
"Back at the 10th day, I was like, you know what, this is me," Jones said.
There is no consensus of opinions among the hundreds and hundreds of protesters, of course. For example, while it is nearly unanimous among the demonstrators that the police officers involved in the killing of Breonna Taylor should be prosecuted, protester Kris Smith sees things differently.
"I really don't believe, me personally, that the police did anything wrong, know what I mean? They did a job. They had a warrant," Smith said, then pointed to his larger motivations for protesting: "I want the rules to change."
Another demonstrator, Lamar Young, also wants policing rules to change, and that's part of the reason he's attended protests. However, he's been disenchanted by what he considers to be distracting behavior from some at the protests who are too jovial and casual. He thinks it's important to remember that it's a protest, not a party.
As he explained this one night, a protester spectacularly leaped from the top of a car on Jefferson Street.
"That's a hard no from me," Young said.
It's only natural. A whirlwind of organizers and civilians have been amalgamated, leading to disagreements among protesting styles and causes to advocate for. But even if everyone doesn't agree, line by line, they are largely on the same page as they protest on behalf of Breonna Taylor.
When a young man tried to take a bat to a window at Metro Hall one night in June, a dozen protesters united to chase him through a chanting crowd of people and cars and into Jefferson Square Park, surrounding him and taking the bat.
Of the varying ideologies within the movement, Wilson, the BLM organizer, explained: "That's with anything."
The movement is a jigsaw puzzle that becomes more complete as organizers and individuals alike find ways to fit in with one another. Although specific courses of action or opinions sometimes differ, the core goal remains the same: a desire for racial justice and freedom.
"It's the same way of getting to the number 12," Wilson said. "You can add 11 and 1, you can do 6 and 6, you can do 4 and 8, you can do 7 and 5, you can do all of these different things in order to get to this end goal ... And I think that's OK as long as we're not minimizing one another."
At a rally in Frankfort on June 25, a bevy of protesters gathered outside of the Kentucky State Capitol, chanting for more than an hour and a half as they awaited several speakers. Throughout pockets of the crowd, vibrant, organic chants would start, and at one point, two separate protesters with megaphones led calls-and-responses that gained traction with the mass: one chant on the east side of the crowd, the other on the west.
The two contending chants continued, partially drowning each other out, until everyone, in unison, together, began yelling the same words.
"Breonna Taylor! Breonna Taylor!"
Hayes Gardner can be reached at hgardner@gannett.com; Twitter: @HayesGardner; Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Demonstrations in response to the killing of Breonna Taylor by Louisville police have continued now for 45 days, but it hasn't been a single organization or even one set of leaders that has propelled the daily protests. Rather, it's been a multitude of forces — community organizations, Facebook Live streamers, a troupe of concerned and passionate citizens with tireless voices and legs — that have banded together to will the protests on.
illustration by jennifer williams/usa today network; and getty images
"It's always different people, and what I love about it is that. It really is a leader-less movement. I just think it is beautiful. It is collaborative."
Cynthia Ganote
Protester and a professor of sociology at the University of Louisville who teaches a course on race in the U.S.
Demonstrators join hands at Jefferson Square Park the morning after Louisville Metro Police raided and cleared the camp.
Photos by Pat McDonogh/Courier Journal
Demonstrators join hands and pray at Jefferson Square Park on the morning of June 28.
$$$