Cave Hill correct to remove Confederate flag amid protests
27 June 2020
It wasn't there for the first 44,982 days after the American Civil War ended.
Then on June 4, 1988, the Sons of Confederate Veterans raised the flag over the graves of about 500 dead Southerners at Cave Hill Cemetery.
And then, just the other day, it disappeared.
Gone.
After about 11,688 days – give or take a week – of flying over the graves of the Confederates and just yards from the graves of gallant men who fought against the South and the scourge of slavery and to preserve the Union, the symbol of hate was lowered.
There wasn't a public ceremony.
No playing of taps.
Nobody cosplaying in gray uniforms.
Just gone.
Not even a press release.
The Sons of Confederate Veterans, which installed the flag pole 32 years ago, didn't even know about it.
When I asked about the flag, Adjutant Bill Hayes said he didn't know it was gone but suggested someone had shinnied up the pole and stolen the flag – the third Confederate flag known as the "Blood-Stained Banner," not the rebel battle flag that most people envision when they think about the Confederacy.
He said then that he would go to the cemetery to replace it and to spray the pole down with silicone lubricant like he has done at the Confederate cemetery in Pewee Valley in an effort to keep people from stealing the flag there.
It's not going to happen any time soon.
On a recent day at Cave Hill, the flagless rope flapped against pole that was dedicated to the memory of Louis Edward Leavell, of the John Hunt Morgan Camp of the Sons of Confederate Veterans.
It gave off a hollow, flat, clanging sound. A marvelous, hollow, flat, clanging sound.
"We made the executive decision to take down the Confederate memorial flag," said Gwen Mooney, the president and CEO of Cave Hill.
She had already dodged two days of phone calls and was clearly hoping that the removal of the flag would have gone unnoticed. She refused to say when the flag came down or why.
"We're not going to say anything more," she said.
Later in the day, Hayes said in an email that's what he was told, too.
"They would not give me any justification why they took it down, but I highly suspect that by removing it, vandalism to other areas of the cemetery would not be as likely," said Hayes, who accused the cemetery of "caving into all of this this anti-Confederate hysteria."
He said he pressed Mooney as to whether the flag will ever be allowed back. She wouldn't answer, Hayes said.
"I bought a plot in Cave Hill in 1999, for myself based upon the fact they had the CSA section ... If they don't change their policy by the end of the year I'll sell my plot and simply be buried in a VA National cemetery," he wrote.
Expect to see more of this as we as a community and a nation deal with fallout from the unjust killing of African Americans by police and as we rethink our use of symbols that reinforce the idea that Black Americans aren't equal, never have been and never will be.
While many white Americans – especially those in the South – argue that the symbols of the Confederacy say nothing about slavery, it's hard to imagine anything else those symbols could mean. The Confederate states seceded for the sole purpose of preserving slavery where it existed and expanding the "peculiar institution" into new territories as the country moved west.
Needless to say, the flag would still be flying over the graves – just to the east of Cave Hill's national cemetery where American troops are buried – if not for the deaths of people like Breonna Taylor and George Floyd and David McAtee and the weeks of protests that have followed.
It may not have happened if Gov. Andy Beshear didn't press and cajole and coerce the state Historic Properties Advisory Commission a couple of weeks ago to take down the statue of Confederate President Jefferson Davis that had stood in the Capitol rotunda for 84 years.
The folks at Cave Hill ought to be proud of removing the flag. They ought to be explaining why they did it.
In fact they shouldn't have allowed it to be raised in the first place, three decades ago and more than a century after the war ended.
Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or by email at jgerth@courierjournal.com. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/josephg.
Joseph Gerth
Columnist
Louisville Courier Journal
USA TODAY NETWORK
The pole from where a Confederate flag flew for 32 years stood empty on Wednesday after Cave Hill Cemetery removed the "Blood-Stained Banner."
$$$
