'I LOST MY MENTOR'
Kachmar, Kala
05 June 2020
The day before David McAtee was shot and killed, he welcomed a uniformed Louisville police officer into his kitchen with a hug.
The officer sat there chatting, perched on a large speaker inside the door — the exact spot where McAtee would die 24 hours later from a bullet to the chest.
The unidentified officer can be seen in a Facebook Live video streamed by McAtee's niece, Velise McAtee. That was normal, she said. Officers came there all the time to hang out.
"He's sitting right here on this speaker talking to us. Like, we're sitting here calmly having a good time," the 28-year-old told The Courier Journal on Wednesday.
"So, why didn't they give us the same respect (and) come to talk to us (before the shooting) like they did the day before?"
McAtee, 53, was killed by a single shot to the chest, and it's not yet known if it came from responding Louisville Metro Police officers or Kentucky National Guard troops. An investigation is continuing.
The incident happened about 12:15 a.m. Monday while authorities were clearing the Dino's Food Mart parking lot across the street from McAtee's home, which doubles as his business, YaYa's BBQ.
At the time, the city had a curfew in place while protests exploded over the police shooting of Breonna Taylor, an unarmed 26-year-old black woman shot at least eight times by officers in her South End apartment on March 13.
LMPD street camera surveillance video released Monday afternoon would show there were no signs of protesters or demonstrators. Nonetheless, authorities sent in dozens of police and guard troops to 26th Street and Broadway to break up what police supervisors described as a "large crowd" congregating there.
Chaos inside the barbecue shack An LMPD officer fired pepper balls to disperse people near the barbecue shack, and then directly into the kitchen through the open door, according to McAtee's friends and family.
A group fleeing from the pepper ball shots rushed into the shop from 26th Street, adding to the confusion inside, witnesses from that night told The Courier Journal.
In the moments that followed, police say McAtee fired a weapon out his door, prompting two officers and two guard troops to return fire, killing him. Kentucky State Police say at least 18 shots were fired by LMPD officers and National Guard troops.
LMPD interim Chief Robert Schroeder said police do not know at whom or what McAtee was shooting.
Video footage released by police doesn't offer a vantage point to show whether McAtee was holding or firing a weapon, but family members said he carried a gun on his hip to protect his business.
No body camera footage exists from the officers in the shooting, a violation of police policy, officials have acknowledged.
Several witnesses at the shop that night told The Courier Journal they had no idea at the time that the initial shots were pepper balls and not lethal rounds.
McAtee's niece was struck by one of the rounds, and can be seen falling back from the impact in surveillance video from inside the shop that police released this week.
A few seconds later, McAtee can be seen on the video stepping into the shack's open doorway and raising his right arm, then stumbling back inside and falling to the ground after he was struck by a bullet to the chest.
David McAtee 'loved the police' It was McAtee's warm relationship with police that makes his death so infuriating to friends and family.
"He loved the police," his nephew, Marvin McAtee, said, "probably more than anyone over here. I wasn't on board with him giving them free food. But it wore on me, and I understood why."
Marvin said police have "cut them breaks" in the past over the loud music they played, but said there has never been any trouble on the property in the five years YaYa's BBQ has been open.
The night before David's death, two on-duty officers asked him and his friends to stay indoors and to turn down the music.
One of the officers, who greeted David with a handshake and hug, sat in the kitchen on the speaker talking for at least several minutes while David cooked, the Facebook video shows.
The next night, David fell on the same spot, his leg moving the speaker as he crashed to the ground.
"The man died in here where he made everybody happy," Marvin said. "He died right here beside his workshop."
Barbecue shop offered 'an umbrella of safety' The shop was considered by some who frequented it as a safe place in the crowded neighborhood.
When someone needed help or a meal or a bathroom, they went to YaYa's.
"Everything goes on around us," said Will Pitts, 39, who considered David family. "If there was an umbrella of safety, a safe haven, this is it."
Pitts said it's likely that the night David was killed, people from the street ran into YaYa's because the neighborhood sees it as a safe place.
"That speaks volumes about how he carried his business on this spot, on this corner," Pitts said.
Velise, David's niece, said things might have turned out differently if the officers dispatched that night were from the local First Division, which regularly polices the area.
"We're here like this every night," she said. "They know us."
Marvin said he hopes to continue the shop's good relationship with LMPD — but he's disappointed that no officers have offered the McAtee family condolences.
"I lost my mentor," Marvin said. "We talked three weeks ago about when this was all over, like when he died, and he wants me to keep the legacy going from what we started.
"I never thought it would be three weeks later."
The food license will be put in Velise's name. David would have wanted it to stay open, she said.
Marvin hasn't opened the cash register drawer from the night David died.
"Whatever we made that night, it's going to stay there," Marvin said. "That's the loyalty I got for him."
Marvin McAtee stands in the doorway of YaYa's BBQ in Louisville's West End, where his uncle, David McAtee, was fatally shot by local law enforcement while responding to a curfew violation in the area.
$$$
