Taylor's family, community gather to honor her life
Duvall, Tessa
26 May 2020
There's still a bullet hole in the window frame of the room where Juniyah Palmer used to sleep.
"It could have been both of us," Palmer said. "I would have been in my bed."
Palmer's sister was Breonna Taylor, who was shot and killed by police in her southwest Louisville apartment in the early morning hours of March 13. Police had a search warrant for Taylor's apartment, which she shared with Palmer, as part of a narcotics investigation. No drugs were found in the home.
Dozens of Taylor's family, friends and community members gathered outside the apartment where she died for a Memorial Day wreath laying. Taylor, 26, was an ER technician at area hospitals who had aspirations of becoming a nurse and helping people.
The physical signs of what happened that night had almost been erased from the apartment building. The green door into apartment No. 4 had been replaced, as had the sliding glass patio door that was once shattered by gunfire. But the bullet hole in the bedroom window was still there, visible in the background throughout the memorial.
Tamika Palmer, Taylor's mother, said until recently, it felt like she and her family were alone in the fight for justice.
"It felt like no one was listening," she said. "Like no one cared what happened here. ... It was frustrating. It was lonely. It was miserable."
Tamika Mallory, co-founder of the New York-based activist group Until Freedom, which helped organize the event, thanked the crowd for being there. The public pressure, she said, is what's helped secure little victories so far, like Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad leaving office and the charges being dismissed against Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker.
Walker was charged with attempted murder of a police officer the night Taylor died. Walker said he did not know it was police entering the apartment, and fired a shot that injured Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly.
"We've been winning little battles," Mallory said. "But there's a major war, and that war is that the officers responsible for taking Breonna's life and for terrorizing Kenny's life, have to be held accountable."
Mattingly and Detectives Brett Hankison and Myles Cosgrove have been placed on administrative reassignment following the shooting, pending the outcome of LMPD's internal investigation. The investigation's findings have been turned over to the office of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron to review for criminal charges, but have not been released publicly.
"These officers must be held responsible. ... The fight has to be stronger. Now, what we know, is that they will move, but they're only going to move based on the pressure that they feel from this community, from all of you."
Mallory urged the crowd to attend a protest outside of Metro Hall at 11 a.m. Tuesday.
Mysonne Linen, Until Freedom co-founder, said in the middle of a pandemic, he and all the others gathered should be safe in their homes. But instead, he said, they were there to stand with a mother who had to bury her daughter not because of a virus, but because of police.
"The fact that we come together here is sad and powerful at the same time," he said.
Before adjourning, Linen left the crowd with a reminder: "You don't have the right to do nothing," he said. "Your silence is condoning this violence."
Tamika Palmer said the recent public support for her family has been unreal.
"She mattered," Palmer said. "Really, that's what it's always been about. She mattered."
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: www.courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Bianca Austin wore a pin with the image of her slain niece, Breonna Taylor, during a wreath laying ceremony outside an apartment complex in Louisville on Monday. Taylor was killed by police officers who were issuing a no-knock warrant at the apartment as she and her boyfriend slept.
Photos by Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier Journal
Tamika Palmer admires a drawing of her slain daughter, Breonna Taylor, by Leslie Hunter, second from left, during a wreath laying ceremony outside an apartment complex in Louisville on Monday.
$$$
