Shawnee AD frustrated with Carroll County spat
Frakes, Jason
26 Sep 2020
Mired in a losing streak that stretches back six years, the Shawnee High School football team still wants nothing more than a chance to play. But frustrated athletic director Mike Jolly said Friday that's becoming harder to do, unless the Golden Eagles travel outside of Louisville.
Jolly announced Friday that Shawnee's football game with Carroll County scheduled for 11:30 a.m. Saturday has been canceled. The news comes a week after Shawnee opened its season with a 14-6 home loss to Trimble County, which Jolly said had to be begged to travel to Louisville.
"The Breonna Taylor thing, I guess, is what it is this week," Jolly said, referring to the downtown protests after Wednesday's announcement in the Taylor case. "Last week it was carjackings with Trimble. ... We jumped through a lot of hoops to get them to come."
Shawnee has a 56-game losing streak – longest in the state – dating to 2014, but Jolly claims that will come to an end with Carroll County's decision not to play Saturday.
"In my mind and my administration's mind, it's a forfeit," Jolly said. "We're just so frustrated. ... This thing went on and on forever, and finally we thought we had it agreed to two or three times. And they finally just said they're not coming."
Carroll County athletic director Paul Stone declined to comment, except to say, "The coaches, the players and myself think we should play."
Carroll County School District superintendent Danny Osborne said the decision was made because of concerns about the safety of his school's players. Jolly said two police officers usually work security during Shawnee's home football games but weren't available this weekend because of the protests. Because of that, fans were not going to be allowed to attend the Carroll County-Shawnee game.
Osborne said Carroll County offered to play the game at its school this weekend and play at Shawnee during the 2021 and 2022 seasons.
"Unfortunately we weren't able to work out a deal to make that happen," Osborne said. "(Shawnee) wouldn't be able to have security on site, and that created a little bit of hesitation. That's important to us for all games, no matter what the situation is. ... Student safety trumps everything. When you do a risk-versus-reward analysis, the reward of playing a football game was nowhere near the risk I'd be exposing my coaches and my kids and my families to.
"I just could not, with a good conscience, recommend they pursue that game."
A spokesperson with the Kentucky High School Athletic Association noted the Board of Control waived all forfeit provisions this season because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
But the Carroll County-Shawnee situation is not COVID-related, so the status of Shawnee's claim of a forfeit is uncertain.
"We just can't get these schools to come down here and play us," Jolly said.
Shawnee, located at 401 Herman Street in the west end of the city, is the only Louisville school in Kentucky's 2A football class. It's in District Five with Carroll County, Gallatin County, Owen County and Walton-Verona, all of which are located northeast of Louisville toward Cincinnati. Schools in the same football district are required to play each other once during the regular season.
Jolly said he understands concerns administrators from schools in the football district might have in traveling to Louisville, which is one reason Saturday's game with Carroll County was rescheduled for 11:30 a.m. on a Saturday.
Central, located in downtown Louisville, moved its football game Saturday to Meade County because of concerns that school had about traveling to the city.
"I know what they see on the news down there," said Jolly, who has taught and coached at Shawnee for five years and became the school's AD in July. "I get it. But that's not this. They don't understand that 'in town' doesn't mean 'downtown.' We're not downtown. Nobody protests around here. We have crime around here, but there's crime everywhere."
Shawnee has dealt with low participation numbers in recent seasons, but that hasn't been the case this season. Jolly said 23 players were in uniform for the Trimble County game, and first-year coach Jalen Harrington has brought a new enthusiasm to the program.
For sure, the Golden Eagles want to break their losing streak. Most of all, Jolly said, they want to play.
"They deserve to get to play," Jolly said. "They've worked their butts off all week. It's like working all week and not getting paid. They don't get paid this week."
$$$
