Fairness Campaign's rebuke of Fischer too late
16 June 2020
Recently the Fairness Campaign announced it was cutting ties with Mayor Greg Fischer over LMPD's use of tear gas and pepper balls against non-violent protesters in Louisville. This represents a major shift for an organization that for years has supported the mayor.When the mayor tried to force a methane plant on residents of western Louisville against the community's wishes, Fairness was silent. When the mayor supported allowing American Synthetic Rubber to spew additional pollutants into western Louisville, Fairness was silent. When the mayor gave $139 million in taxpayer money to the Omni Hotel, despite Louisville being in a housing crisis that disproportionately hurts Black residents, Fairness was silent. When the mayor bulldozed homeless camps, Fairness was silent. When the city passed an ordinance to crack down on panhandlers and jaywalkers, which has been proven to be overly enforced against the Black community, Fairness was silent.Fairness' timing in calling out Mayor Fischer brings serious doubt to their credibility on issues of race and class. Many of the ways in which the mayor's policies have oppressed Black and working class communities have not been widely publicized, and Fairness seems to have been more concerned with protecting its proximity to power than with fighting for racial and economic justice.This doesn't take away from the good work that Fairness has done to advocate against LGBTQ discrimination across the state over the decade. Yet if Fairness is only going to be vocal in standing up for our Black community when people are being tear gassed in the streets, they should quit calling themselves a multi-issue organization.
Connor Allen
Louisville, 40215
No-knock warrants and body cameras It has been confirmed by John Ehrlichman, a top aide in Nixon's administration, that the so-called "war on drugs" was created as a means to oppress and control African Americans (and anti-war hippies) (see Harper's Magazine article, April 2016).
No-knock warrants for these cases are one in many tools of this oppression.
As such, they should have been banned a long time ago. I fully support their ban now.
Additionally, there is absolutely no excuse for a narcotics raid, especially without body cameras active; there have been far too many instances of corrupt police planting "evidence."
As reported in this paper, there has been at least one accusation of evidence planting against one of the cops in the Breonna Taylor raid; he should never have been allowed to continue working without a body camera on at all times.
Ellen Biemer
Louisville, 40218
The need for police reform There are increasing calls for cities to defund their police departments as a means of making substantive changes to how our citizens, especially the way people of color are treated by those departments. While I understand the desire for such radical change, implementing it might be exceedingly difficult, at least in any rapid way.
A step that Mayor Fischer and the Metro Council members could take immediately would be to end the militarization of our police department by refusing any future military supplies from the federal government and divesting the department of any such items now on hand.
If the police could return to being helping partners in the community rather than appearing to be an occupying force we might begin to see changes in the attitudes of the police and toward the police.
Keith Kleehammer
Louisville, 40222
Battling hate For so many centuries, Black Americans have indeed suffered from slave owners, policemen, hate groups. Maybe perhaps they were taught that from an early age to hate Blacks. To hate is wrong. But to love one another is right. That's what I was taught at a young age.
We may not like people's actions, that's OK. We have all been enslaved, by going into your own house and talking about another race badly. That's not OK.
Take the first step and don't engage in talking badly about any race. With George Floyd's death it takes me back to the rope hangings. But using a knee, that police officer was full of hate, disregard for the human race. Or to not take notice that he couldn't breathe. That is not OK.
And thank you protesters for standing up for the ones who were treated unjustly. But there is no reason to tear up our own neighborhoods. And keep the cameras on, so we always know the truth.
Anola M Hamilton
Louisville, 40212
Providing health insurance for Black Kentuckians I think the Gov. Beshear's plan is a noble one, but I want to point out two potential issues:
First, to what degree will a person need to be "Black" to qualify? Will one-fourth be sufficient? One-eighth?
Second, the higher degree of COVID cases among Black people is not a result of being Black. It is the result of a higher proportion of Black people having low incomes and access to quality, affordable health care. Solve the issue of access to quality, affordable health care for all residents, regardless of race, etc. and the proportion of cases of COVID among Blacks should improve.
As a collateral benefit, the overall health of all Kentuckians should improve, and not just concerning COVID. Another collateral benefit should be that low-income residents who could not meet the definition of "Black" would not be resentful of being left out.
If this sounds like universal health care so be it. As long as that idea is rejected, Blacks and other minorities will be hit harder by almost all health issues.
David Isaacs
New Albany, Ind. 47150
Destruction of city's tree canopy Louisville has been designated a "heat island" due to the lack of canopy trees. In 2012 there was 37% tree canopy coverage in Metro Louisville.
The continued loss of canopy trees will have a negative effect on our quality of life and public health. Our trees provide approximately over $300 million in annual benefits to our citizens.
Just recently LG&E has been cutting down our canopy trees rather than trimming them to save dollars. Huge canopy trees in my neighbor's front yards will be chopped to the ground in a few weeks. Trees need to be kept below power lines, we all understand and agree, but is it really necessary to cut down 40 beautiful canopy trees in our neighborhood which provide shade and so many other benefits in order to save money for a public utility that should be considering climate change and the overall aesthetics and quality of life in our city?
Cheryl Crutcher
Louisville, 40207
A woman washes tear gas from her eyes May 29 amid protests in Louisville spurred by the police deaths of several black people.
$$$
