Charges rest in Cameron's hands
Duvall, Tessa
19 July 2020
What, if any, state criminal charges the officers who fatally shot Breonna Taylor will face rests in the hands of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron.
Cameron is the commonwealth's first Black attorney general and the first Republican to hold the office in more than 70 years.
At 34, Cameron has been endorsed by President Donald Trump and is a protege of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
After Jefferson County Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine recused himself from the Taylor case in May because of a conflict of interest, it fell into Cameron's hands.
As attorney general, he could have appointed a special prosecutor but instead opted to keep the case within his office because of the "importance of this matter, the heavy workload associated with the investigation and the amount of time that had already transpired since the shooting."
Cameron repeatedly has declined to give a timeline on when he'll conclude the investigation into Sgt. Jonathan Mattingly, Officer Myles Cosgrove and now-former Officer Brett Hankison, the three Louisville plainclothes officers who fired their weapons and killed Taylor in her home while serving a no-knock warrant March 13.
Now, more than four months after Taylor's death, public pressure – and outrage – is turning on Cameron.
On Tuesday, dozens of protesters marched to his home in Louisville's East End and staked out his lawn, chanting Taylor's name. Eighty-seven people were arrested, including two of the protest's organizers.
Linda Sarsour, a co-founder of Until Freedom, addressed a few of Cameron's neighbors who peered out their windows and stood on their lawns: "We are here to hold Daniel Cameron accountable and make sure that he does his job, because he is not doing his job."
Cameron said the protest at his home was "not acceptable."
"Justice is not achieved by trespassing on private property, and it's not achieved through escalation," he said. "It's achieved by examining the facts in an impartial and unbiased manner. That is exactly what we are going to do in this investigation."
Celebrities such as Beyoncé and Louisville native Jennifer Lawrence have name-checked Cameron, calling on him to prosecute the officers involved in Taylor's death.
A young cousin of the late Muhammad Ali blasted Cameron at a rally, urging him not to be "on the wrong side of history." Petitions circulating on social media have led to his office being inundated with calls and emails about Taylor.
Here's what we know about Cameron:
Who is Daniel Cameron? Cameron grew up in Elizabethtown, about 40 miles from Louisville. His father owned a local coffee shop, and his mother was a professor at Elizabethtown Community and Technical College.
He received a bachelor's degree from the University of Louisville, where he played on the football team and was a McConnell Scholar.
Cameron went on to graduate from the Brandeis School of Law at U of L and was president of the Student Bar Association.
What do we know about Daniel Cameron's legal background? Cameron has been licensed to practice law since 2011.
He worked for two years as a law clerk for U.S. District Judge Gregory F. Van Tatenhove.
He also worked as McConnell's legal counsel for a little more than two years, where he was responsible for ensuring the office was compliant with Senate ethics rules.
As McConnell's general counsel, he also handled a legislative portfolio that dealt with an array of matters coming through the GOP leader's office, including the federal judiciary, law enforcement and criminal justice matters, patent and trademark issues, and Kentucky telecommunications and broadband access initiatives.
In 2017, Cameron joined Frost Brown Todd, one of the most prominent law firms in Kentucky, as a senior associate. There, his law practice focused on government and public policy matters.
A September 2019 lawsuit seeking to remove Cameron from the ballot alleged that Cameron didn't meet the Kentucky constitutional requirement to have "been a practicing lawyer eight years before his election."
The complaint alleged that because Cameron spent two years as a federal clerk – and ethics rules dictate that clerks should refrain from practicing law except in limited circumstances – Cameron did not meet the requirement to become attorney general.
Democratic challenger Greg Stumbo similarly questioned Cameron's qualifications.
"We can't find one instance of Cameron having prosecuted a case – criminal or civil," Stumbo said. "It's a serious question and one that needs to be resolved."
However, Jefferson Circuit Judge Barry Willett sided with Cameron.
Cameron went on to beat Stumbo by more than 200,000 votes and was elected to office on Nov. 5, 2019.
What are Cameron's political platforms and beliefs? Before launching his campaign for attorney general, Cameron acknowledged that if he won, it would "be a significant milestone."
"I don't shrink from that fact," Cameron said in December 2018. "I fully appreciate what it could mean for Kentucky, what it could mean for the Republican Party. My identity is important to me."
After winning his race, Cameron told reporters: "I hope it says to people that look like me, regardless of if they have a Republican or Democratic designation by their name, that it is possible to be an African American and win statewide elected office here in the commonwealth."
In his election night victory speech to supporters, Cameron thanked McConnell and called for the continued success of the Republican Party.
"I want to make it very clear that I have an obligation to you all, to the Fraternal Order of Police, to our law enforcement community more broadly, to stem the tide of the drug epidemic," Cameron said. "Hold me accountable to make sure I'm doing everything accountable to improve the outcomes for all of Kentucky."
Cameron has been endorsed by Trump, who called him a "star" of the Republican Party.
"He is tough on crime, strong on borders and will fight for our Second Amendment," Trump wrote on Twitter. "Daniel will never let you down. He has my full and complete endorsement!"
Cameron called Trump's endorsement "an honor" and said he looked forward to cracking down on illegal immigration.
The Kentucky Fraternal Order of Police also endorsed Cameron, as did prosecutors, sheriffs and jailers across the state.
Berl Purdue, the state FOP president, said Cameron would "be there for us in the future. Not in the short run, but in the long run."
In accepting the endorsement from the FOP, Cameron said he saw the role of attorney general as being an advocate for prosecutors and the law enforcement community, and "making sure that they know they have a voice in the attorney general's office."
What has Cameron done while in office? One of Cameron's promises while campaigning was to "depoliticize the office" of attorney general. He routinely criticized then-Attorney General Andy Beshear for his lawsuits against then-Gov. Matt Bevin and the Republican-controlled legislature – such as the one that blocked Republicans' controversial public pension bill in 2018.
Now that Beshear, a Democrat, is governor and Cameron the attorney general, Cameron has similarly been unafraid to challenge Beshear in the legislature and in court.
Cameron told lawmakers in June that they should put limits on the emergency powers Beshear has used in response to the coronavirus pandemic, saying there aren't checks and balances on the governor's powers during a state of emergency.
"But even in the context of a pandemic, state actions undertaken pursuant to emergency powers are subject to important limitations," Cameron said Thursday. "The feedback that we've received from many Kentuckians suggest a need to establish oversight and limiting principles on executive power during a state of emergency."
Cameron also has challenged Beshear's executive order mandating that Kentuckians wear masks in public.
Republican Agriculture Commissioner Ryan Quarles and an orchard and cider mill in Georgetown filed a lawsuit challenging Beshear's past orders limiting customer capacity at certain businesses, and Cameron intervened to support them.
A Scott County judge issued a temporary restraining order on future gubernatorial executive orders just hours before Beshear was set to mandate statewide mask usage last week. Cameron praised the judge's move, calling it "a clear win for the rule of law."
Beshear responded by saying masks "shouldn't be political."
"The AG in Kentucky is the only AG in the country suing a governor over these restrictions," Beshear said. "We've got to move past it."
The lawsuit filed by the Georgetown orchard is one of several Cameron's office has joined over the past two months as he has sought to strike down all pandemic-related restrictions on businesses and churches in Kentucky.
Kentucky's mask mandate still went into effect as Beshear ordered, but Cameron filed a motion the same day seeking a ruling on whether the governor's order violated the Scott County judge's restraining order.
On Friday, the Kentucky Supreme Court temporarily halted a Boone County judge's ruling siding with Cameron to block all of Beshear's past and future public health orders responding to the COVID-19 emergency.
In June, Cameron was one of 17 state attorneys general who signed on to a letter to Trump and congressional leadership "denouncing the dangerous 'defund the police' movement."
What has Cameron said about the Breonna Taylor case? Cameron has said relatively little about the Taylor case, often declining to address specific questions because the investigation remains ongoing.
Cameron has refused to put a timeline on deciding the case and repeatedly called for patience from the public, saying his team is working diligently on the investigation.
"I know it's not been as quick as anyone would have liked, but know and trust that we are doing our best to complete this investigation in a timely manner," he said Monday.
He has publicly offered his condolences and sympathies to Taylor's family.
"I just want to say to Ms. Breonna Taylor's family how I continue to be sad and heartbroken by the loss of a daughter," Cameron said at a June news conference. "Ms. Tamika Palmer lost a child. My mother has invested a lot of time and energy into me, and I know if something happened to me, she would certainly be heartbroken."
Reach Tessa Duvall at tduvall@courier-journal.com and 502-582-4059. Twitter: @TessaDuvall. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: courier-journal.com/subscribe.
Daniel Cameron grew up in Elizabethtown. His father owned a local coffee shop and his mother was a professor.
$$$
