Emotional support for protesters
Loosemore, Bailey
16 Aug 2020
The therapists arrive shortly after 7 p.m., setting up a table beneath a tree at Jefferson Square Park.
It's Day 64 of racial justice demonstrations in downtown Louisville. And before protesters leave for their nightly march, the therapists are here to check on anyone who might need to talk.
There are six of them tonight, but there are dozens more in a still-growing network of clinicians and social workers who have volunteered to offer free counseling services for people who've spent two months demanding justice for Breonna Taylor, an unarmed Black woman who was shot and killed by Louisville Metro Police at her South End apartment.
At the core of the protesters' fight is a call to end racist practices that traumatize Black communities, including police brutality and gentrification. And the therapists know that if the protesters want to keep pushing forward and make systemic changes, they need to take care of themselves mentally and emotionally.
"They're on the front lines every day," said Millicent Cahoon, 25, who led the creation of the therapists group. "A lot are having trouble sleeping, depression, feeling very anxious. ... We just want to make sure that they're protected because they're the ones that are fighting for us on the front line."
Though mental health has long been a taboo topic in Black communities, healing has become a recurring theme through Louisville's protests — now in their 11th week — with several groups organizing events and services for the predominantly Black participants.
Three days after the protests began, Black Lives Matter Louisville held a Healing Ceremony outside the KFC Yum Center. And the group has since hosted regular online healing hours with professors, ministers and psychologists.
Local activist Ari Tulay helped orchestrate a healing and art festival in July. And since late June, the network of therapists has provided free counseling for protesters at Jefferson Square Park — called "Injustice Square" by local activists — and at demonstrations across the city.
Cahoon said the network formed in the hours after photographer Tyler Gerth was killed in a shooting at the park on June 27, with members knowing protesters would need to talk about what they'd witnessed.
But therapists have continued to regularly return to the park and outside demonstrations as a way to bring mental health services to people who don't always have access — and who might not even realize they need them.
"When you're out there going all day and all night, it's hard to be present, to know what's going on in your body and know what's going on in your personal life," said Cahoon, who is entering a doctorate program at the University of Louisville. "So we want to make sure that they can be able to do this work and also have time and relaxation out of this. Know when to turn it on and when to turn it off."
Cahoon and other therapists said protesting can cause stress and trauma because participants are often inundated with racist rhetoric and placed in situations that can cause their heart rates to rise, such as encounters with police in riot gear.
"It can be mentally, physically and spiritually exhausting," said Alaina Newman, an employee with Meridian Behavioral Health. "... There are a lot of things really out of our control. We don't get to make a decision on the Breonna Taylor case, but we can decide how we respond.
"It's super important that we be grounded and know what's happening within ourselves so that we can respond well to people or to things."
Members of the group said protesters might not seek traditional therapy because they think they can't afford it or they don't see anyone in the field who looks like them.
But many of the involved clinicians and social workers are Black. And some have volunteered to provide one-on-one counseling sessions to protesters pro bono.
"It's so important to acknowledge that even after this movement is over, people need to continue to take care of themselves," Cahoon said. "Hopefully from the healing hours and art therapy, they're taking these things and using them for other parts of their life, too. I think it's giving mental health a totally different platform."
Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at bloosemore@courier-journal.com, 502-582-4646 or on Twitter @bloosemore. Support strong local journalism by subscribing today: https://www.courier-journal.com/baileyl.
Therapists Cheryl Ades, Millicent Cahoon and Corinsa Smith stand at a booth in Jefferson Square Park in on July 29. They are part of a network of therapists who have volunteered to support protesters through ongoing demonstrations against police brutality and racial injustice.
Bailey Loosemore/Courier Journal
A member of the crowd wipes away tears May 31, during a Black Lives Matter healing rally in front of KFC Yum! Center.
Max Gersh/Courier Journal
Courtney Artis closes her eyes and prays with the crowd May 31, during a Black Lives Matter healing rally in downtown Louisville.
$$$
