America's police have ugly history
Myers, Amrita Chakrabarti
12 July 2020 
America has been set on fire. It now seeks a racial restart from the smoldering ashes as protests enter their second month across the country. A healthy restart, however, is difficult without an honest accounting of how we arrived at this terrible moment.
One factor at the center of discussions on national transformation is the relationship between police and Black citizens. It is a story that did not begin with Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, Dreasjon Reed, George Floyd or Rayshard Brooks. They are just the latest victims in a long history of racial toxicity, abuse and death.
In actuality, Black people have been terrorized by police long before Black Lives Matter became a hashtag. The latest uprisings have been gaining speed since 2014, as we have witnessed a series of senseless deaths at the hands of the "boys in blue." They've culminated in a conversation being driven to the forefront that some of us have been having for a while: a call to defund the police.
The question is, how did we arrive here, at this place in time, where the police behave like storm troopers – smashing down doors at night, shooting people in their homes, choking citizens to death, wearing riot gear, teargassing peaceful protesters, firing rubber bullets at people's heads, deliberately destroying medical supplies and water, carrying assault weapons and brutalizing unarmed civilians? These are unspeakable atrocities.
Much of this is not surprising if we understand that policing in America arose out of the slave patrol – a system where white men in every district throughout the southern states were charged with riding the roads at night to ensure that Black people weren't out after dark. Blacks being out at night was seen as dangerous. They were supposedly conspiring to rebel, committing property crimes or fleeing from bondage.
Any Black person found out past sundown was stopped, searched for weapons and required to show documents proving they were free or running an errand for their owner. If no papers could be produced, they were taken to jail to wait for their master to claim them (usually after being roughed up). They were sold on the auction block if no white person vouched for them. Even if they had freedom papers, many free Black people had them destroyed by patrollers and were sold into slavery anyway. Think "12 Years a Slave."
The connections to current "stop-and-frisk" policies are clear. The truth is, Black folks have always been seen as white people's property or as threats to white people's property. Put simply, the police were created to protect white people's right to own Black people, or be protected from (menacing) Black people.
To suddenly expect these same forces to view African Americans as citizens whom they should "serve and protect" because of the passage of the 13th Amendment was a mental stretch that never materialized. In fact, many members of American law enforcement joined the Ku Klux Klan when it was created after the Civil War. The connections between policing and white supremacist organizations are thus historically long, and remain strong.
Fast forward to 40 years ago. Police forces began to militarize at unprecedented levels as a result of the so-called "war on drugs." In reality, this was just another chapter in America's ongoing "war on Black people." While the current opioid crisis (which has a white face) has been handled as an illness requiring treatment, crack, which ravaged the Black community, was criminalized. Consequently, never-before-seen amounts of money poured into policing, and the numbers of officers in Black communities increased exponentially.
As this process evolved, police began purchasing military grade weapons and assault vehicles across the country. For example, the department in the city that houses my university spent $250,000 to purchase an armored vehicle, claiming our small town of 85,000 needed it for hostage rescue situations.
To be sure, the "boys in blue" have long had a license to kill. We're seeing now, from D.C. to Louisville, Minneapolis to Los Angeles, the lengths they're willing to go to retain that power. The question is, how do we stop them? The answer is, we begin defunding them.
It's already happening. Recently, the mayor of Los Angeles announced he was diverting $150 million from the police budget and reallocating it to youth jobs, health initiatives and healing the community. The Minneapolis City Council voted to defund and dismantle their police department and rebuild from scratch. Council President Lisa Bender stated, "our efforts at incremental reform have failed."
It's time for us to try something new if we're truly committed to racial justice, because our current system of policing isn't keeping Black people safe. It was never meant to. As Audre Lorde said, "the Master's Tools will never dismantle the Master's House." And the police have long served as tools of the master.
Yes, we must take assault weapons away from the police. Yes, we must hit their pension plans when they break the law. Yes, we must have community oversight. Ultimately, however, we must decrease police forces by diverting funds away from them. We need new ideas that aren't based on old systems, because the historical system of policing is structurally racist.
Things can't remain as they are. Where we go from here and what kind of country we build now is up to us. We have an opportunity to create something better. We have a chance to do better. We have a charge to be better. We must begin by dismantling the slave patrol. It is long overdue.
Amrita Chakrabarti Myers is a Ruth N. Halls Associate Professor of History and Gender Studies at Indiana University in Bloomington. A published author, speaker and activist, she sits on the Core Council of the Bloomington chapter of #BlackLivesMatter. Follow her on Twitter @CountessCanuck.
Your Turn
Amrita Chakrabarti Myers
$$$
