Metro Council to launch inquiry into Taylor case
Costello, Darcy
30 June 2020
The Louisville Metro Council intends to launch an investigation into how Mayor Greg Fischer's administration handled the fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor, officials announced Monday.
The probe will be conducted by the Government Oversight Committee, which has subpoena powers, the committee's leadership said at a Monday press conference.
"The citizens of this community, including members of this Metro Council, have been very upset with the perceived lack of transparency by the city," said Councilman Brent Ackerson, who chairs the committee. "It's our intention, as a committee, to formally begin an investigation, to bring people in and get legitimate answers and legitimate documentation."
The scope of the investigation has not been formalized in a resolution. But according to a news release, the probe is expected to look into:
Events leading up to and following Taylor's March 13 death
Government transparency or the lack thereof
Events surrounding the death of David McAtee
Use of force by police during protests
"Overall, by being as broad as possible, we get the most amount of truth," Ackerson said.
The Metro Council is on summer break for the next two weeks, but it's possible a resolution could be filed when it returns mid-July. The next council meeting is scheduled for 6 p.m. July 23.
Asked by The Courier Journal whether the investigation was meant to build a case to remove Fischer from office, Ackerson said it was not.
"We don't want to jump to any conclusions," Ackerson said. "At the end of the day, what we want is ... the truth. And from there, people can make reasonable conclusions, based upon facts."
A spokeswoman for Fischer said in a statement Monday evening that the mayor welcomes the Metro Council's review, which comes in addition to reviews by outside agencies including the state attorney general and FBI.
Spokeswoman Jean Porter noted that the mayor has already authorized a "top-to-bottom" review of LMPD and a separate review of actions related to the Taylor case.
"And to be clear, he is not waiting on any of those reviews to make changes, as evidenced by his decision to ban no-knock warrants, to require broader use of body cameras and replace prior leadership at LMPD," Porter said.
Taylor, an emergency room technician, was shot and killed by police who were at her apartment to serve a no-knock search warrant signed by Judge Mary Shaw. Police have said they knocked and announced themselves, but attorneys and neighbors disagree.
Taylor's boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, fired a shot as police entered, thinking they were intruders, according to his attorney. Police returned fire, striking Taylor and killing her in her hallway.
One officer who fired his weapon, Brett Hankison, has been terminated from LMPD but is appealing that decision. The other two officers the department says fired their weapons – Jonathan Mattingly and Myles Cosgrove – have been placed on administrative reassignment.
Taylor's death is under investigation by the FBI and the state attorney general. An internal investigation by LMPD's Public Integrity Unit has been turned over to both agencies.
But Ackerson said the Metro Council's investigation would be different than others, in which findings are shielded until the work is complete, because it would be conducted in public with "TVs rolling."
"You, the community, will have the information as we're having it. As we're discussing it," Ackerson said. "The days of hiding the ball in this town, those have to stop."
It's not clear whether the council committee intends to hire an outside investigator, but officials said they were considering looking at outside legal counsel.
Both Ackerson and Councilman Anthony Piagentini, R-19th District, who vice-chairs the committee, criticized the lack of transparency coming from city officials and the county attorney, and suggested they would be open to subpoenaing documents that haven't been publicly released, such as Taylor's autopsy report.
A Courier Journal records request for her autopsy was denied. The news outlet has appealed that decision to the attorney general, arguing it and other records were improperly withheld.
Asked whether he would subpoena the document and release it publicly, Ackerson said, "I would love to do that."
"I think it should already be out there. We shouldn't have had to wait for the 911 calls. We shouldn't have had to wait for the investigative reports."
And the council members described wanting to get answers on who was making decisions around using force against protesters, calling in the National Guard and the police response to YaYa's BBQ the night McAtee was shot and killed.
In Indianapolis, the mayor initiated an independent review of the city police force's response to protests in late May and early June. It is meant to assess city policy and law enforcement actions, as well as to provide recommendations for the future.
The Metro Council's review of LMPD appears to be more wide-ranging in scope.
Piagentini said initiating such an investigation is one of the few tools council has to subpoena documents, put people under oath and "get answers."
"We want to get past speculation. We want to get the truth," he said.
Protest on Second Street Bridge leads to 33 arrests, 19 towed cars. Metro, 3A
A portrait of Breonna Taylor, made by local artist Jaylin Stewart, is projected onto Metro Hall during a celebration of her life and a protest against police brutality and injustice on June 5.
$$$
