Donations pour in for abortion clinic vandalized in protests
Schneider, Grace
07 June 2020
An abortion clinic in Louisville has received thousands of dollars in donations to repair damage suffered in downtown demonstrations over the police shooting of an African American woman.
After three days, an effort aimed at raising $100,000 for repairs at the EMW Women's Clinic had drawn more than $129,000 by Saturday evening.
More than 3,700 donors, including those in Canada, Great Britain, Finland and Denmark, offered support in the name of reproductive freedom and Black Lives Matter. A doctor in Alaska sent $100 "in honor of Breonna Taylor," the unarmed black woman who was fatally shot in a Louisville police raid at her home on March 13.
Her death and that of other African Americans, including George Floyd's in Minnesota, have sparked outrage and demonstrations across the country. Late on May 29, vandals smashed windows, sprayed graffiti and looted dozens of downtown Louisville shops, hotels and storefronts.
Pharmacies, a Walmart and sporting goods stores were also looted in parts of southern Louisville.
EMW, 136 W. Market St., had its front windows broken and a TV stolen. Even though it's remained boarded up, the clinic has continued seeing patients, said Meg Stern, support fund director for the Kentucky Health Justice Network and a volunteer escort at EMW.
Unlike many other downtown businesses, the clinic is no stranger to protesters and acts of vandalism. The longtime business, which is also black-owned, is "always a target," Stern said.
EMW's charitable arm, the Kentucky Reproductive Freedom Fund, housed at the Community Foundation of Louisville, has received many donations to help the business.
But to take those under $250 to underwrite repairs this week, supporters created a GoFundMe page to temporarily handle smaller gifts. Many ranged from $25 to $50.
The response has been immense and humbling, Stern said. Undoubtedly, Louisville's moment in the global spotlight has played a role, she said.
Protesters gather in front of the EMW Women's Surgical Center in Louisville during an anti-abortion protest on May 9.
$$$
