U of L scholarship for nursing students created to honor Taylor
Watkins, Morgan
08 June 2020
U of L Health is creating a scholarship for nursing students in honor of Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old ER tech whom police officers shot and killed in her own home in March.
Taylor worked at U of L Health-Medical Center East before she died.
"We grieve her loss, but we are hopeful her legacy can inspire meaningful change," U of L Health CEO Tom Miller said in a university news release Friday. "This scholarship is part of an overall commitment to ensure diversity in our workforce and develop ongoing plans to eliminate racial inequality in health care."
The Breonna Taylor Memorial Scholarship Fund in Nursing will cover full tuition and fees and will be a four-year, renewable award, according to Friday's news release. To choose a recipient, preference would be given to a black woman who lives in Kentucky.
Taylor's mother, Tamika Palmer, said she appreciates that the university and the U of L Black Student Union are partnering together to honor her daughter in this way.
"Breonna is smiling down knowing that there will be a path for students to pursue nursing degrees without accumulating student loan debt," Palmer said in a statement Friday. "Thank you to the university and its students for ensuring that Bre's legacy will continue for generations to come."
U of L Health, a nonprofit that's affiliated with the university and runs U of L Hospital, Jewish Hospital and other local health care facilities, is governed by a board of directors that unanimously supported establishing the scholarship, Friday's news release said.
"While I didn't know Breonna, I have learned that she was a wonderful person and a health care hero," U of L President Neeli Bendapudi, who is a member of that board of directors, said. "Our hope is that this scholarship will provide the opportunity for another phenomenal young Black woman to follow in Breonna's footsteps."
The protests against police brutality and racism that began in Louisville late last week have been marked by calls for justice for Taylor. Her death is still under investigation.
Louisville Metro Police Department officers entered Taylor's home on March 13 after securing a no-knock search warrant.
Taylor was unarmed when they shot and killed her.
Friday was her birthday. She would have turned 27.
A U of L Health scholarship in shooting victim Breonna Taylor's name will be a four-year, renewable award.
$$$
